THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA ROAD FUND

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE 2020











TABLE OF CONTENTS

Opinion - 3
Basis for Opinion - 3
Key Audit Matter - 3
  1.0 Implementation of Approved Budget - 3
Other Information - 6
Management Responsibilities for the Financial Statements - 7
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements - 7
Other Reporting Responsibilities - 8
Report on the audit of Compliance with Legislation - 8
  2.0 Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) performance - 8
Transfers to other Organizations – UGX 428,691,792,822 14 4.0
  5.0 Construction of the URF/PPDA House - 17
  6.0 Governance Issues - 18











LIST OF ACRONYMS

Acronym	Meaning	
BN	Billion	
DAs	Designated Agencies	
DUCAR	District Urban and Community Access Roads	
FY	Financial year	
GoU	Government of Uganda	
IESBA	International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants	
IFMIS	Integrated Financial Management Information System	
ISSAIs	International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions	
INTOSAI	International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions	
MDAs	Ministry Departments and Agencies	
MOFPED	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development	
MoWT	Development Ministry of Works and Transport	
NTR	Non Tax Revenue	
PFMA	Public Finance Management Act	
PPDA	Public Procurement and Disposal Authority	
TAI	Treasury Accounting Instructions	
URF	Uganda Road Fund	
UGX	Uganda Shillings	














REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE AUDIT OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA ROAD FUND

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2020

THE RT. HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

Opinion

I have audited the accompanying financial statements of Uganda Road Fund which comprise the statement of Financial Position as of 30 th June 2020, and the Statement of Financial Performance, Statement of Changes in Equity and Statement of Cash Flows together with other accompanying statements for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the financial statements of Uganda Road Fund for the year ended 30 th June 2020 are prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with Section 51 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the Financial Reporting Guide, 2018.

Basis for Opinion

I conducted my audit in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs). My responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of Uganda Road Fund in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 (as amended), the National Audit Act, 2008, the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) Code of Ethics, the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (Parts A and B) (IESBA Code), and other independence requirements applicable to performing audits of Financial Statements in Uganda. I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA Code, and in accordance with other ethical requirements applicable to performing audits in Uganda. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Key Audit Matter

Key audit matters are those matters that, in my professional judgment, were of most significance in my audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of my audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming my opinion thereon, and I do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. I have determined the matter described below to be a key audit matter communicated in my report.











to collect all government revenues Thus, the Fund continues drawing financial support
from the Consolidated Fund through Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic
Development (MoFPED).

To achieve its mandate, URF planned to implement a number of both recurrent and development deliverables under various programmes. A review of the entity’s budget revealed that the Fund had an approved budget of UGX 448,832,000,000, out of which UGX 442,996,577,571 was released. The Table below shows a summary of the key deliverables of the financial year 2019/20:

Sn	Key deliverables	Amount Spent (UGX)Bn	Cumulative percentage of Actual expenditure	
i.	URF Secretariat operations	6.663	1.5	
ii.	URF/PPDA Construction house project	7.641	1.2	
iii.	Donor Funding- Strengthening capacity	-	-	
iv.	DUCAR	113.700	26	
v.	City Roads- KCCA	32.301	7.3	
vi.	National roads- UNRA	282.691	64	
	Totals	442.997	100	




U ganda Road Fund planned to achieve its deliverables through the implementation of fifteen (15) outputs with a budget of UGX 448 Bn. I sampled twelve (12) outputs worth UGX. 442 BN representing 90% of the total budget for review and below are the findings.

No	Observation					Recommendation	
1.1	Implementation of the strategic plan. The overall Government National Development Plan (NDP II) expired at the end of FY 2019/20By the time of its expiry, Uganda Road Fund was yet to align its strategic plan objectives with that of the NDP II, as the entity was still awaiting approval of its objectives by the Woks Sectoral Planning Committee.currently has a strategic plan which runs from FY 2019/20 to FY 2022/23. This plan is yet to be aligned to NDPIII, and therefore the entity has no certificate of compliance from the National Planning Authority.that this was its first year of operation, I carried out and assessment of the objectives set out in strategic plan with the objectives and outputs in the annual plan. I noted that key objectives set out in the strategic plan were in line with the outputs developed in their activity work plan.noted that out of the planned twelve (12) strategic targets, six (6) targets had been fully achieved, three (3) were partially achieved while three (3) were not achieved at all as summarized in the table below. Refer to details in Appendix I. The extent of achievement of outputs in the work plan No Level of performance of by of 2019/2020the endNo outputs% of number outputstotal ofIURFGiven					I advised the accounting officer should ensure that the entity’s objectives are aligned the National Development plan (NDPIII) and a compliance certificate obtained.with	
							














1 2 3activitiesThe		Fully achieved 6					50			
		Partially achieved 3					25			
		Not achieved 3					25			
		Total 12					100			
		Accounting Officer explained that the Implementation of was based on funds disbursed to that activity.								
advised the Accounting Officer should follow up on the implementation of unfunded activities while budgeting for funds the subsequent year.forI1.2 Revenue Performanceof GoU receipts The entity budgeted to receive UGX 448.8Bn out of which UGX 443Bn was released, resulting in a shortfall of UGX. 5.6Bn which is 2% of the budget. Revenue shortfalls affect the implementation of planned activities.Accounting Officer explained that the underperformance was mainly due to failure to receive donor funding from the EU, and the deduction by MoFPED of amounts to some activities that were to take place during the 4 th quarter due to the Covid-19 pandemic.PerformanceThe										
										
										
1.3 Under absorption of funds Out of the total receipts for the financial year of UGX 443,150,937,971, UGX 442,996,577,571 was spent by the entity resulting in an unspent balance of UGX 154,360,400 representing an absorption level of 99.9%. The unspent balance at the end of the financial year was subsequently swept back to the Consolidated Fund account. Refer to the table below; Year 2019/20APP EST “A” (UGX billions)RELEASE “B” (UGX billions)Expenditu re“C” (UGX billions)Unspent“D=(B- C)” (UGX billions)% Absorption448.8 443.1 442.9 0.2 99.9%under absorption of released funds was caused by failure by the entity to implement some activities like monitoring and evaluation, whose funds had been released but amounts had not yet been paid.absorption of released funds results in non- implementation of planned activities.Accounting Officer explained that there were some delays in the conducting of monitoring and evaluation activities, and that the activities were greatly affected by COVID-19.TheUnderThe									planI advised the Accounting Officer should and execute activities in time to avoid funds being swept back to the Consolidated Fund	
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
1.4 Implementation of quantified outputs I assessed the implementation of twelve outputs with a total of one hundred fifty three (153) activities that were fully quantified with a total of twenty (20) activities which could not be quantified. I noted the following as shown in the summary in table below and detailed in Appendix II.									I advised the Accounting Officer to endeavor to implement planned activities in accordance with approved work plans and budgets.	
										














of level of implementation of FullyofExtent of implementa tion activities per category of outputRefer to Appendix IIRefer to Appendix IITotal no of activiti esExpen diture UGX% of imple menta tion27%24%18%0.43 280.61 241827% 0.263 26Refer to Appendix II153 96 1.303 96Fully implemente d Partially Implemente d Not Quantifiable Not Implemente d 1 Total751 2057Quantified outputs Activity details-Analysis Category of outputNo of activiti esof planned activities implied that the planned service delivery to the intended beneficiaries was not achieved.Accounting Officer explained that this was due to the effect of COVID 19 that led to lockdown in the 4 th quarter.BnSummaryNon-implementationThe								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
1.5 Submission of Quarterly Performance Reports Paragraph 55 of the budget execution circular for the financial year 2019/2020 states that the Accounting Officer is required to submit quarterly performance reports by the 30 th day of the first month of the following quarter.entity provided quarterly reports showing quarterly performance but there was no evidence that these reports were submitted to Ministry of Finance together with their corresponding resolutions.to submit performance reports in time is not only contrary to the circular standing instructions it affects the timely evaluation of performanceTheFailure							I urged the Accounting Officer should submit the reports on a quarterly as required the guidelines- Verifybasis by	














consistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work I have performed, I conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, I am required to report that fact. I have nothing to report in this regard.

Management Responsibilities for the Financial Statements

Under Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 (as amended) and Section 45 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Accounting Officer is accountable to Parliament for the funds and resources of the Uganda Road Fund.

The Accounting Officer is also responsible for the preparation of financial statements in accordance with the requirements of the Local Governments Financial and Accounting Manual, 2007 and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and for such internal control as management determines necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, the Accounting Officer is responsible for assessing the Fund’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting, unless the Accounting Officer has a realistic alternative to the contrary.

The Accounting Officer is responsible for overseeing the Uganda Road Fund’s financial reporting process.

Auditor’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements

My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISSAIs will always detect a material misstatement, when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users, taken on the basis of these financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with ISSAIs, I exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. I also:-

- Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.

- Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Fund’s internal controls.

- Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the management.

- Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on











the Fund’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Ministry to cease to continue as a going concern.

- Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with the Accounting Officer regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.

I also provide the Accounting Officer with a statement that I have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on my independence, and where applicable, related safeguards.

From the matters communicated with the Accounting Officer, I determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. I describe these matters in my auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, I determine that a matter should not be communicated in my report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.

Other Reporting Responsibilities

In accordance with Section 19 (1) of the National Audit Act, 2008, I report to you, based on my work described on the audit of Financial Statements, that; except for the matters raised in compliance with legislation section below, and whose effect has been considered in forming my opinion on financial statements, the activities, financial transactions and information reflected in the financial statements that have come to my notice during the audit, are in all material respects, in compliance with the authorities which govern them.











Through a review of the statement of revenue collected for the FY 2019/20, it was noted that the Fund neither budgeted nor collected revenue from road users fees and fines under the Traffic and Road Safety Act; however, for the case of revenue derived from the sale of property, it was noted that although the Fund had budgeted to collect UGX 1,798,641,870 from disposal of assets, only UGX 154,360,400 (8.6%) was collected resulting into UGX 1,644,281,470 (91.4%) unrealized. Management did not explain the cause of this shortfall.

It was noted that the Fund could not collect the road user charges because of the incongruence in the URF Act 2008 and the URA Act 1991.

Whereas Sections 21 of the Uganda Road Fund Act requires that URF collects User charges as a source of revenue to the Fund, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) collects Road User charges as part of their revenue collections and makes remittances to the Consolidated Fund as per section 14 of the URA Act. This is contrary to Section 21 of the Uganda Road Fund Act 2008 which requires user charges to be directly remitted to the Fund on a monthly basis. This implies that the Fund cannot access all the funding sources envisaged under its Act.

The Accounting Officer explained that URF planned for NTR of UGX 1,798,641,870. The External contribution of UGX 1,729,470,500 was expected from the European Union to support the technical assistance intervention. From the disposal of assets, URF realized UGX 154,360,400 against an initial budget of UGX 69,171,370. Going forward URF would review and plan for NTR from disposables based on what is achievable.

I advised the Accounting Officer set realistic revenue targets and strengthen its internally generated revenue collection strategies to ensure that all planned revenue is collected. I also advised the Accounting Officer to engage with the relevant stakeholders to address the issues surrounding the collection of road user charges.

3.0

Management of Government Vehicles (Fleet Management)

Over the years, there has been increasing demand for accountability and better management of public resources by various stakeholders in Uganda. Management of government vehicles (Fleet management) is faced with a number of challenges, such as: inability to respond to national emergencies, like COVID 19; inability to support the delivery of public service by government entities; high government expenditure on purchase of vehicles; misuse of government vehicles; inaccurate vehicle management records; and a general lack of a comprehensive and standard government fleet management policy.

- Acquired in compliance with Government vehicle acquisition guidelines;
- Comprehensively recorded in the assets register to ensure their proper management;
- Adequately allocated, operated and utilized to enable delivery of public service;
- Properly and regularly maintained to achieve optimal performance, increased useful lives and reduced running costs; and
- Disposed in compliance with PPDA guidelines, and disposal proceeds are properly accounted for.











The study took a scope of three financial years: 2017/18-2019/20. From the procedures undertaken, I noted the following key observations;

	Key Observations	Audit Recommendation	
3.1 3.1.1	OF MOTOR VEHICLESFor the three financial years the Uganda Road Fund planned to spend UGX 1,050,000,000 on acquisition of vehicles funding. A sum of UGX 600,070,993 was warranted by the Treasury for the purpose, and the Secretariat eventually spent UGX 600,070,993. The Fund purchased seven (7) vehicles.from governmentof the budgets with the actual funding revealed shortfalls of UGX 449,929,007 (42.86%) implying that the entity could not procure the necessary vehicles and this impacted on service delivery. UGX 200,000,000 and UGX 250,000,000 were budgeted for in FY 2017/2018 and FY 2019/2020 respectively but were not funded by MoFPED.Accounting Officer explained that URF continues to plan for the management of the motor vehicle fleet with provisions for maintenance, acquisitions and disposal made every year. However the budget execution circulars and inadequate the procurement of vehicles and this makes it difficult to conduct URF activities efficiently.funding have continued to haltACQUISITION FundingComparisonThe	ofadvised the Accounting Officer to follow up with the Ministry in accordance the required to ensure funding of the URF budget.Finance with approvals,I	
3.1.2	with Government Ban on Acquisition of Motor Vehicles According to the Circular letter Ref; BDP/86/107/03 and dated 15 th May 2019 from the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury to all Accounting Officers, Government issued a freeze order on purchase of vehicles by all MDAs during the FY 2019/20. Further guidance from the Ministry of Public Service (MoPS) through a Circular letter Ref; ADM 99/205/01 dated 21 st August 2019 indicated for procurement of vehicles under on-going donor-funded projects.that clearance would only be givennoted that the entity complied with the guidance that was provided.ICompliance	he Accounting Officer is commended for the good practice.T	
3.1.3	with vehicle standardization guidelines of Government Public Service Circular Standing Instruction No. 1 of 1999 and the Establishment Notice No. 1 of 2003 require standardization of vehicles for government officials and Projects by setting out engine capacity limits and vehicles specifications.noted that the vehicles acquired over the period of 3 years were in line with the approved engine capacity and specification of the type of vehicles as entitled.ICompliance	The Accounting Officer is commended for the good practice.	














3.2 3.2.1	Improper maintenance of Motor Vehicle Records Section 34 (2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires an Accounting Officer to keep a register of assets and inventory in the format prescribed by the Accountant General. Furthermore, Paragraph 16.6.1(e) & (f) of the TIs, 2017 requires recording of the acquisition cost and estimated useful life of the asset, which should assist in determining the time of replacement and depreciation cost of an asset.Furthermore, Paragraph 10.13.4 of the Tis, 2017 requires all fixed assets acquisitions to be captured in the fixed assets module of the Government Computerized Financial Management Information System (GFMIS).However, a review of 4 vehicles acquired during the period under review including 1 vehicle transferred from the Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT) revealed that;total of 4 vehicles (57%) out of the 8 physically inspected were duly recorded in the fixed assets register (FAR) with one missing in the FAR (belonging to the (MoWT)) let to URF at the inception of the Secretariat in 2009.total of 7 vehicles (87.5%) out of the 8 inspected were recorded in the format as prescribed by the Accountant General which required capturing; date of purchase, type of vehicle, registration number, acquisition cost, estimated useful life, physical location, and condition. However, 1 vehicle (12.5%) acquired at a total cost of UGX0 obtained from MoWT was not recorded appropriately since it belongs to the MoWT.total of 7 Vehicles (87.5%) were traced to the staff or locations as recorded in the assets register which allowed traceability of vehicles.A total of 7 vehicles (87.5%) were annually inspected and reconciled to the assets register.summary, there were no instances of non-recording of vehicles in the asset register, in the prescribed format by the Accountant General, except for the vehicle that belongs to MoWT. There was also evidence of regular inspection and reconciliation of vehicles in the assets register.A AAMOTOR VEHICLE RECORDINGIn	he Accounting Officer is commended for the good practice.T	
3.3 3.3.1	MOTOR VEHICLE USAGEFailure to maintain Fuel Registers Section 16.3.1 of the Treasury Instructions, 2017 requires the Accounting Officer to put in place measures to eliminate theft, losses, wastage and misuse of vehicles. Furthermore, Section 7(c) (F - i) of the public Service standing orders requires every Ministry, Department or Local Government to designate an officer to be in charge of transport matters, who shall among other duties, maintain	advised the Accounting officer to ensure maintenance of fuel register on all the URF Secretariat vehicles andaI	














	a fuel register on any Government vehicle and carry out monthly fuel reconciliation exercises.noted that whereas the URF designated a Transport Officer responsible for transport matters, fuel registers were not maintained for all the 8 motor vehicles held by the URF Secretariat.failure to maintain fuel registers makes it difficult to implement fuel cost monitoring controls, and may delay early detection of misuse of fuel.accounting officer explained that they use the UBA fuel card to monitor fuel consumption/ usage. Cards are located to each department and statements received every quarter. The Administrative Officer is empowered through rights allocated by UBA to monitor each fuel card usage.ITheThe								ensure that proper fuel monitoring controls, including reconciliations, are put in place for efficient fuel consumption.	
3.3.2	Failure to maintain proper vehicle logbooks Section 7 (g) of part (F-I) of the Public Service Standing Orders requires every Government vehicle to have a log book in which the driver records all the journeys made. It further requires that each journey entered in the log book shall be certified by an authorized officer by countersigning against each entry.review of log books of all the 8 vehicles held by the URF Secretariat revealed that none had either been updated on a weekly basis with journeys made, fuel and maintenance costs or duly certified by an authorizing Officer.Accounting officer explained that the existing log books were maintained and updated to enable effective monitoring of vehicle usage. Journeys for town runs will also be recorded going forward.AThe								advised the Accounting officer to ensure log books are consistently maintained for all vehicles of the Secretariat clearly indicating journeys made to enable effective monitoring of vehicles with an objective of curbing down misuse.I	
3.3.3	Less vehicles in the Secreta riatLimited coverage of Designate d Agencies internal Audit workA review of the vehicle allocation to key service centers in the URF Secretariat revealed that some departments or units were not adequately allocated vehicles as indicated in the table below; Unit No. /Dep of artm veh ent icle requ s iring allo vehi cat cles edReaso ns for inadeq uate allocat ionType of vehicl es alloca tedS Effects NAre allocate d vehicles adequat e and appropr iate (YES/N O) 1 Inter 1 No nal AuditPick- up MazdaSupport to Entity Service Delivery								he Accounting officer should engage the MoFPED for continued support on the Capital investment in field vehicles.T	
										
										














2 M&E 1 Pick- No up Mazda3 Fund 1 No Mana gerPick- up MazdaLess vehicles in the Secreta riatLess vehicles in the Secreta riatLimited coverage of Designate d Agencies Monitoring and Evaluation field activities. Limited coverage in terms of backstoppi ng Designate d Agencies on the proper budgeting, utilization and accounting for road maintenan ce funds. Limited /non- verification of emergenc y claims before release of funds.siteallocation of vehicles to the above URF departments/units affected the oversight efforts of those department/units, thus affecting the level of service delivery to backstopping, auditing and, monitoring and evaluation of the performance of the DAs.in regardAccounting officer explained that the entity had planned to increase the fleet available for fieldwork over 3 years. For the year 2022/23 to 2024/25 we expect to have increased the fleet with 8 extra vehicles.InadequateThe										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
										
VEHICLE MAINTENANCEMaintenance of Motor Vehicle Service Analysis Records Section 13 of the public Service Standing Orders requires the driver to ensure that Government vehicles are regularly serviced (including oiling and greasing); a Service Chart will be kept by the Transport Officer (T/O) on every Government vehicle in his or her charge. It is however, the duty of the driver of the vehicle to ensure that the service chart is followed strictly.review of records indicated that repair and service analysis register for all the 8 vehicles (100%) held by theA3.43.4.1									he Accounting Officer is commended for the good practice.T	
										
										
										














URF Secretariat were maintained. It was further observed that the Transport Officer did maintain a service chart for all the 8 vehicles tested.								
DISPOSAL OF VEHICLESlife; are beyond economicalNon-compliance with disposal conditions Paragraph 15.11.1 of the TIs, 2017 requires that where it is considered that vehicles have reached the end of their useful repair or are unserviceable for any other reason; or have become redundant through obsolescence; shall be retained until a sufficient quantity is accumulated to merit the convening of a Board of Survey to inspect them, and it shall be the duty of such Board to determine the action to be taken, including the decision to board them off.3.5that twoHowever, from the review of the Board of survey reports for the period under review, and the assets register, I noted the recommended 5 years useful life, and one (2) of these vehicles had their mileage above the recommended 250,000km, hence the vehicles were due for disposal. See the summary in the Table below.(2) vehicles had exceededNon-compliance with disposal conditionsDetails Years in use Mileage1-5 Years6-10 YearsBelow 250,000kmAbove 250,000kmTotal 6 1 6 2Above 10 Years 1was attributed to inadequate allocation of funds and a freeze on motor vehicle purchases. Continued usage of old vehicles results into high costs of maintenance and uneconomical fuel consumption.accounting officer explained that URF has for the FY2021/22 provided for the procurement of 4 vehicles to replace the 2 old and 2 extra for field work. The Accounting officer also indicated that they shall engage the Ministry of Finance to ensure adequate funding is provided and the Minister of Public Service for the authority to procure the extra vehicles.3.5.1Table:ThisThe							advised the Accounting Officer to engage Ministry of Public Service and PSST for a waiver vehicle purchase together with MoFPED funding to acquire more new vehicles.foronI	
								
								
								
								
								
								
								
								














4.1

Unbudgeted emergency/special releases – UGX 11,055,166,936

Regulation 19(2) of the Uganda Road Fund (Financial and Accounting) Regulations 2011 requires all expenditure on items included in the Annual Road Expenditure Budget to be made strictly within the approved budget limit for each item.

A review of the Uganda Road Fund Budgeting and Operational Guidelines 2019 revealed that URF Board allocated and approved UGX.3,566,000,000 to address emergencies/special interventions on the DUCAR network. However, review of the quarterly reports and the analysis of the payment files revealed actual releases amounting to UGX 14,621,660,574 resulting in excess releases of UGX 11,055,166,936 above the approved budget of UGX 3,566,493,638. In addition, URF did not carry out field verification before the release of funds. In addition, there were no Board approvals for the same funding.

The funds disbursements were not undertaken in accordance with the established procedures. This present a risk that funds may be diverted or not utilized in accordance with the intentions of the approving authority.

The Accounting Office explained that funds were received at the end of FY and due the lockdown at that time attributed to the outbreak of COVID 19; it was a challenge receiving all the required Board approvals prior to disbursement of the funds. Attempts to hold a virtual Board meeting were futile.

I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that all emergency funds are approved by the Board before release to the beneficiary agencies.

4.2 Unapproved work plans

Clause 21 of the URF budgeting guidelines require agencies to prepare Annual Road Maintenance Programmes (ARMP) prioritized within the available budget. The plans should be accompanied by a District Roads Committee approval minute in case of Local Governments, Board approval minute in case of UNRA and Council approval minute in case of KCCA.

Contrary to the above requirement, the ARMP from UNRA lacked a Board approval and some ARMPs from local governments lacked District Road Committee (DRC) approvals such as Moroto MC, Hoima MC, Kitagwenda DLG, Kabarole DLG, Koboko DLG, Alebtong, Kyegegwa, Apac, Koboko MC, Otuke DLG, Luwero DLG, Kibaale DLG, Kaabong DLG and Kitgum MC.











4.3 Inconsistencies between the Programming department’s reported release

and actual release by the Funds Management department - UGX. 20,031,923,834

The Programming Department after the guidance of the URF application formula for disbursing funds comes up with a schedule of releases to be transferred to each of the DAs by the Fund management department on a quarterly basis.

A comparison of the releases proposed for programming for DUCAR agencies with what was actually released by Fund management of the Secretariat revealed a variance of UGX 20,031,923,834. Accordingly some agencies got more while others received less than what the allocation formula had indicated. The inconsistency was a result of the Secretariat not following the allocations derived by the allocation formula but instead derive their own allocation methods that were not supported by any documentation availed for audit verification. Whereas the allocation formula was derived with support from EU funding, the team’s effort to establish its cost were rendered futile as the procurement file to that effect was not availed to the team.

The prevailing circumstances throw into question the value derived from the funds paid for developing the ‘allocation formula’ since its results are not honored and followed while allocating funds to designated agencies.

Whereas Accounting Officer explained that in the FY2019/20, the fund allocation formula was applied and IPFs generated and allocations communicated to the agencies and that the inconsistencies between the Programming department’s IPFs and actual release by the Fund Management department was a result of a shortfall of releases from Treasury on quarter 4, I observed that some DAs received more than what was provided by the allocation formula.

I advised the Accounting officer to ensure that the allocation formula is followed while allocating funds to designated agencies.

4.4 Under absorption of funds released to Designated Agencies – UGX 3,993,652,934

The Annual Road Expenditure Plan and the One Year Road Maintenance Plan both provide that the road maintenance works are delivered by the Designated Agencies. The DAs thus develop programmes of works and implement them. The Designated Agencies have a direct control over the visible impact of the road funding while the Secretariat is mandated to undertake timely monitoring and evaluation of all works in all designated agencies supported by the Fund.











I advised the Accounting officer to ensure timely execution of monitoring and evaluation activities for all DAs supported by the Fund, to ensure that DA’s are followed up in respect of proper and timely utilization, and accountability of allocated funds.

4.5

Failure by DUCAR agencies to submit accountabilities

Paragraph 13.6 of URF Planning and Programming Policies and Procedures Manual, 2019 stipulates that within two weeks after the end of each quarter, all designated agencies shall submit accountability statements in respect of the monies of the Fund released to them in the quarter.

I noted that some agencies did not provide accountabilities to the Secretariat as was required. A total of UGX 48,823,499,301 remained outstanding in un-submitted accountabilities. The laxity to avail accountabilities was a result of the Fund’s failure to devise measures of compelling accounting officers to comply as required. There is a risk of misallocation of funds provided to the Designated Agencies.

The Accounting Officer explained that the fund faced a challenge of failure of the designated agencies (DAs) to timely submit the requisite accountabilities as required in the URF Planning and Programming Policies and Procedures Manual, 2019 which can be attributed to number of factors such as delays by sub-agencies to submit their reports to the DAs. This challenge was exacerbated by the COVID-19 breakout which affected normal functioning of DAs in H2-2019/20. The Accounting Officer also explained that the Fund was in the process of finalizing the procurement of an IMIS system which will have the RMMS module to aid in timely submission of work plan and accountabilities.

I advised the Accounting officer to devise measures of ensuring timely accountability from all designated agencies supported by the Uganda Road Fund.

5.0

Construction of the URF/PPDA House

Uganda Road Fund signed a Memorandum of Understanding with PPDA on 16 th October 2013 to design and build a new joint home at Plot 39 Nakasero Road Kampala, for a total contract sum of UGX 57,537,660,673. Review of contract documents revealed the following matters:

5.1

Time progress vs physical progress of the project

I noted that the project had delayed in terms of works completion. Whereas the project was planned to end in October 2020, the physical progress was reported at 43% while the time progress was 72% as of May 2020 yet only five months were left to the end of the project. The delays may necessitate project time extension. However, there was no evidence of cautions imposed by the project combined Contract Management Team (CMT) from both PPDA and URF to both the Contractor and supervising consultant expressing concerns of project delays.











I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure closer monitoring to ensure handling of any challenges in execution.

5.2 Time progress of the Supervision consultant is not in tandem with the physical progress of works Best practice requires that all civil works should have a supervising consultant to offer technical support to the employing agency. Ms. Symbion was contracted to supervise the contractor, Ms. Seyani, for the construction of the project. These were contracted in October and November 2017 respectively so that the contractor’s works are adequately supervised by the supervising consultant. I noted that due to the delays in the constructions works, the contractor progress was at 43% while the Supervising consultant’s time progress was at 83% and had also been paid more than 80% of the contract sum.

The two employing agencies (PPDA and URF) may be compelled to extend the contract of Ms. Symbion to the project completion date, hence escalating the total house project contract value.

The Accounting Officer explained that the 14 th joint PPDA/URF Board Committee meeting of 9 th September 2020 and subsequently the 11 th joint Board (PPDA and URF) meeting of 24 th September 2020 considered the project progress report and approved the Project Management Team’s recommendation of time extension of Ms. Symbion by 4 months ending 30 November 2021. He further indicated that this will enable the consultant extension match the time extension that had been earlier approved for the contractor. The Accounting Officer also explained that the same meeting approved the amendment of the construction contract to allow for the payment of 50% of material and installations delivered on site with the balance paid on installation which will enable the contractor to fast track implementation of the scheduled works.

I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that the project is completed within the extended timelines to avoid further extensions and likely cost escalations.

6.0 Governance Issues

6.1

Monitoring and Evaluation Activities at URF

The URF undertakes Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) activities every quarter in a financial year. Agencies are selected across the country including UNRA stations, Districts (with their Town Councils and Sub Counties) and Municipalities. The aim is to ensure that at least each DA receives an M&E team from URF to enable the Secretariat has a record of an M&E report from each agency. Challenges faced by agencies are established, efficiency improvements and good practice are ascertained, and the teams come up with reports which feed into Management, Board and wider stakeholders.

- Ensuring effective and timely monitoring of the implementation of performance agreements signed between URF and DAs,
- Timely production of M&E reports to inform decisions in the key operations of the Fund,
- Effective collection of data on condition of public roads and identification of the various relevant parameters that directly affect delivery of road maintenance services, and











- Recurrent identification of key policy issues for the attention of the Fund Board, and lessons for continuous improvement.

The M&E activities are fully undertaken in house by staff of the Secretariat and the URF Board. (7-8)Teams led by a Board member and augmented by technical staff are deployed each quarter implying at least 32 reports are expected annually. However, it was noted that, the approved work plan is not executed as planned resulting in non- attainment of the laid M&E planned outputs and objectives. For example during the year under audit, only four reports were available.

This was partly attributed to the difficulty in ensuring the availability of the Board Members who are part of the teams since they are not full-time employees of the Fund, and have busy schedules elsewhere which impedes timely execution of M&E activities. Also, the M&E reports are received by Top Management and then approved for escalation to Board for approval before actions are taken. However, the Board being part of the M&E fieldwork teams raises conflict of interest arising from the self-review. The full time involvement of the Board members in undertaking M&E activities impairs the oversight function of the Board as enshrined in the URF Act.

The Accounting Officer explained that the Board in the execution of its mandate under S44 of the URF Act, 2008 undertakes M&E at the agencies. This was done with the guidance of Management as a learning/induction process considering that most Board members joined the Board without Road Sector governance experience. As they learn to independently undertake this function and gain experience in the road sector; Management will henceforth facilitate Board members to independently undertake M&E as recommended.

I advised the Accounting Officer that the Board members should independently undertake M&E in the Board oversight function.

John F.S. Muwanga











APPENDICES Appendix I- Implementation of the Approved Budget

ammeProgr	Sub Progra m /Projec t	Output	Activitie s/ Key Perform ance Targets	Are there clear targets and perform ance indicator s to measure progress (Yes/No ) If no give reason	Planne d Target for the Financi al year (A)	Budgeted amount (‘000’) (B)UGX	Revised budget UGX (000)(C)	Amount released (000) (D)	Amount Spent UGX (000) (E)	Achieved Target by Financial year-end (Annual performa nce report) (F)	Output Variance	Implementa tion status (Fully (F), Partially (P), or Not Implemente d (NI))	Was the activity reporte d on in the periodi c monito ring reports - (Yes/N o) If no give reason	Is the performa nce of the activity accuratel y reported in the annual performa nce reports- (Yes/No) If no give reason	
											Variance (A-F)				
Progra mme: 0452	Sub Program me: 01 Headqua rters Finance and administr ation)(	Output: 045201 Road Fund Secretari al Services	URF Allocatio n formula reviewed and calibrate d	yes	1	8,349,750	8,349,750	7,641,437	7,641,437	0	0	Not Implemented	No Monitori ng reports were mainly on transfers to road mainten ance	No; as earlier indicated.	
			Report on Spot M&E field activities undertak en	Yes	4					2 Spot M&E activities undertake n	2	Partially implemented	No Monitori ng reports were mainly on transfers to road mainten	No	




20











	ance		
Periodic technical and financial reviews	Yes	45					30 districts and municipals covered from the review of internal audit reports	15	Partially implemented	No Monitori ng reports were mainly on transfers to road mainten ance	No	
Program tracking field report	yes	4					4 quarterly reports prepared for UNRA and DUCAR agencies	4	Fully implemented	No Monitori ng reports were mainly on transfers to road mainten ance	No	
		Output: 045252 District, Urban and Communi ty Access Roads	Tarmacki ng 1km in 26 Town councils	Yes	Not quantifie d	162,133,427	162,133,427	146,001,066	146,001,066	Funded 26kms of road in 26 Town Councils	0	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	
			Special interventi ons on public selected roads	Yes	Not quantifie d					Special Interventi ons made in 21 Town councils/ municipal roads/KCC A	N/A	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	
			Support Technical Support Units	Yes	50					Was still under procureme nt by end	50	Not Implemented	No Monitori ng reports	No	




21











	(TSUs)							of year			were mainly on transfers to road mainten ance		
			Finance distresse d areas/ regions	Yes	27					25 identified districts were given extra funds distress areas as maintenan cefor	2	Partially Implemented	Yes	Yes	
			Routine Manual maintena nce of paved and unpaved roads	Yes	30,338k ms					30,532km s of road funded. Excess funding on KCCA roads and underfundi ng on other DUCAR road network	-	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	
			Routine mechaniz ed maintena nce of paved and unpaved roads in municipa ls KCCAand	Yes	12,284k ms					6,623kms of mechanize d road funded	5,661 Kms	Partially Implemented	Yes	Yes	




22











			toIncrease M&E from 45% 45% through outsourci ng	No	Not Quantifi ed					Outsourcin g for M&E was not done	N/A	Not Implemented	No Monitori ng reports were mainly on transfers to road mainten ance	No	
		Output: 045251 National Roads Maintena nce	Weighbri dges operated and maintain ed	Yes	10 mobile and 10 fixed	270,000,000	270,000,000	282,190,000	282,190,000	All operated and maintaine d	0	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	
			Maintena nce of Ferries	Yes	9					9	0	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	
			Routine manual maintena nce of paved and unpaved roads	Yes	18,948 kms					18,948km s	0	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	
			Mechaniz ed maintena nce of paved and unpaved roads	Yes	4,798 kms					4,798kms	0	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	




23











			Periodic maintena nce of paved and unpaved roads	Yes	4,536 kms					4,761kms	-225kms	Fully Implemented	Yes	Yes	
		Output: 135251 Members hip to Internati onal Organiza tions (CAPAM, AAPSCO M,AAPA M)	Subscript ion to internati onal Organiza tions (AAPAM, AAPSCO MS, and CAAPAM) managedorganizat ions3	yes	3	10,000	10,000	12,500	12,500	Subscripti on to internation al Organizati ons (AAPAM, AAPSCOM S, CAAPAM) paidandorganizati ons3	0	Fully Implemented	No Monitori ng reports were prepare d	to confirm after inspection	
		Output: 045254 Develop ment Budget	ofConstruc tion the PPDA/UR F house24% of annual works complete d	Yes	24% of annual works complet ed	6,200,000	6,200,000	6,200,000	7,641,437	Annual works were 25% of the whole project	0	Fully implemented	No Monitori ng reports were prepare d	No	
						446,693,177	446,693,177	442,045,003							




24











Appendix II- Implementation of Quantified Outputs

Functional description	Activities	Output Indicators	Nooutputof	Annual planned target	Activities	Total number of activities	Descriptioninputs requiredof	%age of impleme ntation		
ED1 Inter and intra sector participation	Attendance of conferences, meetings, knowledge transfer workshops, etc	1. Reports	12	1. 12 No. reports	1. Conference attendance 2. Paper preparation and presentation 3. preparing reports	3	1. Staff Time 2. Board members time 3. Consumables	8%	Partially Implemented	
PDU 1 – Procurement planning	Approved Procurement Plan for 2018/19	1. Approved Procurement Plan submitted to PPDA	1	1. Submission to PPDA by 1st April 2017	PlansofSubmission toConsolidation1. Meetings with User Departments 2. Departmental 3. Obtain relevant approvals of Consolidated Plan 4. Authorities	4	1. Staff2. ConsumablesTime		Not quantifiable	
PDU 2 –Provide Secretarial services to the CC	Reportsubmissions to CCon	1. No. of successful submissions	1	1. At least 80% approval decisions	1. Facilitation of CC Meetings 2.Implementation of CC Decisions	2	1. Staff 2. Allowances for cc meetings 3. ConsumablesTime	60%	Partially Implemented	
PDU 3 –Procurement and disposal plan	Manage procurement and asset disposal cycle for all goods, works and services for the year	1. % of procurement and disposal plan implemented	1	At least 80%	needsrecords1. Prompt timely initiation of 2. Receipt of requisitions 3. Preparation of Bidding Documents 4. Issuance, receipt, bid opening and evaluation of offers 5. procurement 6. Submit to CCMaintenance of	6	1. 2. Allowances for cc meetings 3. ConsumablesStaff Time	70%	Partially Implemented	
PDU 4 – Statutory reporting	Prepare procurement reports and returns to the PPDA	1. No. of reports	12	12 reports	reports1. Preparation procurement 2. Obtain CC approval 3. submission of reports to PPDAof	3	1. Staff2. ConsumablesTime		Non quantifiable	




25











PDU5 – Assessment of Providers	Performance and shortlist of providersreport annual	1. No. of Reports Report on Performance	1	01 Assessment	1. Analysis of contracts placed 2. Compilation of monthly performance reports for placed 3. Meetings with User Depts. 4. Manage of shortlisting providers for engagement on framework 5. Report writingcontractsbasisprocess	5	1. Staff Time 2. Consumables		Non quantifiable	
FM1Management-Fund	Fund monitoring	1. Inspection of financial systems at DAs report	4	1. 4 no. management and utilization of funds at DA report	1. Inspection of financial systems at DAs report 2. Verification of accountability to collate with submission	2	1. 2. 3. ConsumablesStaffFunds time	100%	Fully Implemented	
FM1.2 Realisation from non-RUCs sources e.g. adverts on bridges, road signs and parking fees	2. Revenue monitoring reports in place	1. 1 no. quarterly revenue forecast report per quarter	4	2. 4 no. Rev monitoring report by end of every quarter	of1. Identification and estimation 2. Determination of URF revenue 3. Collecting data from various current revenue collectors. URA, Police, oil 4. Report preparationyields potentiale.g sector etc	4	Staff time1. Funds2.3. Consumables		Non quantifiable	
	FM1.4reconciliationFund	Fund performance reports prepared	4	4 no. of quarterly reports	Preparation of quarterly performance and management reports	1	1.2. ConsumablesStafftime		Non quantifiable	
Financial Accounting	Asset management	Physical financing managementand asset	4	4 no. of quarterly reports	Update the register quarterly with additions and disposals	1	1.2. ConsumablesStafftime	75%	Partially Implemented	
	FM 2.6 Statutory accounts	Semiannual, monthly and final reports prepared	3	3 no financial reports preparedstatutory of	final1. analyzing and consolidation of financial data 2. Gazetting of accounts	2	Staff time Consumables1. 2. 3. Service provider	100%	Fully Implemented	
FM3AccountingManagement	FM3-2monitoringBudget	Budget/ activity performance reports prepared	12	12preparedreports	Collection and analysis of data. 2. preparation of budget performance report	2	. Staff2. Consumablestime	100%	Fully Implemented	
PM2- Review user charges Allocation Formulaeroad and	Reviewed and Calibrated Allocation Formula	1. 1 no. report in place.	1	1 no.	1. Supervise consultant for review of calibrated allocation formula 2. Collection of calibration data	2	Consultant Staff time1. 2. 3. Funds		Not Implemented	




26











PM5- Preparation of Annual Road Expenditure Programme	Annual Maintenance Annual Expenditure PlanRoad Plan/ Road	1. Number of approved Annual Road Maintenance Plan /OYRMP/ Annual Road Expenditure Plan	1	1 no.	1. Consolidation of FY 2020/21 work plans 2. Preparation of annexes to Annual Performance Agreements 3. Printing of the OYRMP	3	Staff time Consultant1. 2. 3. Funds		Not Implemented	
	RMMS Training of Das	1. Number of training reports	1	1 no.	1. Procurement of input materials 2. Undertaking training of DAs 3. Preparation of training plan 4. Roll out the RMMS	4	1. Staff2. Fundstime	25%	Partially Implemented	
PM6- Review Annual Road Maintenance Programmes of designated agencies	Road safety report.	Number ofreports	1	1 no.	. Supervise study on Road safety. 2. Road safety awareness campaign	2	1. Staff time	100%	Fully Implemented	
DUCAR	Quarterly review Accountability reports	Number of quarterly review reports in place	4	4 no	1. Receipt of quarterly accountabilities 2. In-house review of quarterly accountabilities	2	1. Staff2. Fundstime	100%	Fully Implemented	
	Programme tracking field reports	reports1. Number of field in place	4	4 no.	1. Track programmes in UNRA and DUCAR Agencies	1	1. Staff time	40%	Partially Implemented	
	ReviewAccount Guidelinesof Force	1. Number of field in placereports	1	1 no.	1. Undertaking field visits to DAs; 2. road maintenance activities; 3. road equipment; 4. Collecting views and data on improvement of force account processes and procedures;Inspection ofInspection of	4	1. Staff2. Fundstime		Not Implemented	
PM7-Improve condition of roads in DAs.	Report on roads data collection study		1	1 no.	1. Supervise study on roads data collection; 2. Undertaking field visits to agencies	2	Staff time Consultant1. 2. 3. Funds		Not Implemented	
PM8-Improve operational efficiency of DAs.	Planning, Implementation and reporting road maintenance training of Das	1. Number of staff trained 2. Number of training reports in place	2	2no. Trainings	3. Supervise TSU on capacity building programme of pilot DAs; 4. Organize centralized training of selected DAs; 5. Undertaking field visits to pilot DAs; 6. Prepare field reports	4	Staff time Consultant1. 2. 3. Funds	100%	Fully Implemented	




27











Monitoring and Evaluation of Physical and Financial Performance of DAs.	Reports on physical and financial performance of URF Das	No. ofproducedreports	2	2no.	Report1. Retreats for analysis of quarterly progress reports from DAs 2. writing 3.Printing and publishing (70 copies)	3	1. Staff time; 2. Support Staff/Interns (4 no.) 3. Funds	100%	Fully Implemented	
	Report on Spot M&E field visits by URF staff	of M&E of Progr in DAsNo. Reports Funded ammes produced	4	4no.	staff1. Spot M&E field visits by URF 2.Report writing/ Consolidation of reports from M&E teams 3. Printing and publishing (70 copies per quarter)	3	travel; time;Inland Staff1. 2. 3. Funds	54%	Partially Implemented	
URF InternalMonitoring Reports	URF InternalMonitoring Reports	No. ofproducedreports	2	2no.	2. Data analysis/ collation	1	Staff time		Not quantifiable	
URF M&E Manual	Finalization and printing of URF M&E Manual	No. ofproducedreports	1	1no.	1. Making 300 copies 2. 3. Report disseminationTypesetting	3	Staff time;2. Funds1.		Not Implemented	
Road Satisfaction (RUSS)User Survey	Finalization printing of RUSS Reportand 2019	No. ofproducedreports	1	1 no.	1. Making 500 copies 2. 3. Report disseminationTypesetting	3	Staff time;2. Funds1.	100%	Fully Implemented	
Implementation of URF Data Framework	URF Database	Up to date database of road statistics	1	1no.	1. Data collection/ collation 2. Database update	2	1. Staff 2. staff/intern 3. FundsTime; Support	100%	Fully Implemented	
	Data Assessment District Governmentsquality of Local	No. ofproducedreports	1	1no.	tools collectionofanalysis1. Development assessment 2. Data 3. Data 4. Reporting	4	1. 2. 3. FundsStaff SupportTime; staff	0%	Not Implemented	
IA1 – Technical & Financial reviews	Conduct technical financial reviewsperiodic and	Reports for each DA	45	· 45 districts and municipalities to be reviewed · 10 spot audits of Das	Prepare1. Conduct preparatory/administrativ e arrangements for the reviews 2. audit programme to ensure systematic review 3. Conduct desk review of agencies for review 4. Conduct audit entry meetings 5. inspections/verifications on the selected agencies 6. Conduct audit exit meetingsselectedCarry out field		.2. IA PersonnelFunding	100%	Fully Implemented	




28











IA2-Follow up on the status of implementation of previous audit recommendations in agencies	Establish the status of implementation of previous audit recommendations in Agencies	the ofReport on status implementation of previous audit recommendations	30	30 districts and municipalities to be followed up	Conductselected1. preparatory/administrativ e arrangements for the follow up exercise 2. Conduct desk review of agencies for follow up 3. Conduct audit follow up meetings and field inspections 4. Conduct exit meetings of follow up agencies, report and finalizationwriting	4	1.2. IA PersonnelFunding	67%	Partially Implemented	
URF scheduled and statutory reporting	Prepare and disseminate monthly, quarterly and annual reports of the Fund	for· 1no. annual report FY 2017/18 · 3no. Quarterly report FY 2017/18for	1	1 no. report	• review • Data collection, analysis and preparation of reportsLiterature	2	Staff time Technical1. 2. Assistance 3. Funds	0%	Not Implemented	
formation operation ofOversee and DRCs	· Review extent and produce quarterly reports on functionality of DRCs	· 4no. reports on status of DRCs	4	4no. Reports	• Field Visits • Data collection, analysis and preparation of reports •Presentation to FMC/Board and follow up on recommended actions	3	1.Staff2. Fundstime	0%	Not Implemented	
Management of Risk register	Identify and mitigate risks to the Fund	1no. updated risk management register · 1no. quarterly risk monitoring report	4	4 no. quarterly reports	• Update of the risk register and submission for approval • Data collection, analysis and preparation of reports •Presentation to FMC/Board and follow up on recommended actionsBoard	3	1. Staff time	0%	Not Implemented	




29











