OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL
UGANDA

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UPGRADING OF RWENKUNYE – APAC LIRA – ACHOLIBUR ROAD PROJECT (252.5Kms) (IDB LOAN UGA 1030)

IMPLEMENTED BY UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY (UNRA) FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2022











Table of content

Table of content - ii
List of Acronyms - iii
Opinion - 1
Basis for Opinion - 1
Key Audit Matters - 1
Other Matter - 1
Road sections with pending access issues - 1
1.0
  2.0 Site Possession - 2
3.0
Titling of Road Project Land - 4
Mobilization of Road Construction Equipment - 4
5.0
Other Information - 5
Management Responsibilities for the Financial Statements - 5
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements - 6
Other Regulatory and Reporting Requirements - 7
Internal Controls - 7
Report of the Auditor General on Statements of Funds Receipt and Expenditure for
Upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira – Acholibur Road Project For the year ended
30 th June, 2022 …8
Opinion - 8
Project Management’s responsibility for the Statement of Expenditure - 8
Auditor’s responsibility - 8
Report of the Auditor General on the Special Account for Upgrading Of Rwenkunye –
Apac – Lira – Acholibur Road Project for the year ended 30 th June, 2022 - 9
Opinion - 9
Project Management’s responsibility for the Special Account - 9
Auditor’s Responsibility - 9
Report of the Auditor General on the Internal Controls for Upgrading Of Rwenkunye
– Apac – Lira – Acholibur Road Project for the year ended 30 th June, 2022 - 10
Opinion - 10
Management Responsibility - 10
Auditor’s Responsibility - 10

Implementation of Quantified outputs....................................................................... 3 4.0











List of Acronyms

Acronym	Meaning	
IsDB	Islamic Development Bank	
GoU	Government of Uganda	
IESBA	International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants	
ISAIs	International Standards on Auditing	
IPC	Interim Payment Certificate	
MoFPED	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development	
MZO	Ministry of Lands Zonal offices	
NAA	National Audit Act	
OAG	Office of the Auditor General	
PAPs	Project Affected Persons	
UGX	Uganda Shilling	
UNRA	Uganda National Roads Authority	
USD	United States Dollars	














REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UPGRADING OF RWENKUNYE – APAC – LIRA – ACHOLIBUR ROAD PROJECT

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2022

THE RT. HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

Opinion

I have audited the accompanying Project financial statements of Upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira - Acholibur Road Project (UG Loan No 1030) implemented by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for the financial year ended 30 th June 2022. These financial statements comprise the Project Statement of Funds Receipts and Expenditure for the financial year ended 30 th June 2022, the Statement of Fund Balance as at 30 th June 2022, Statement of Cash Flows for the year then ended and Notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory notes, and Notes to the financial statements from pages 24 to 39 including a summary of accounting policies used.

In my opinion, the financial statements present fairly in all material respects, the financial position of the Upgrading of Rwenkunye –Apac – Lira - Acholibur Road Project as at 30 th June 2022 and its funds receipts and expenditure for the financial year ended 30 th June 2022, in accordance with the basis of accounting and preparation of the financial statements described on page 28 to the Financial Statements and the terms and conditions of the Islamic Development Bank Project’s Financing Agreement No. UGA-1030

Basis for Opinion

I conducted my audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). My responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of UNRA Project Management (Upgrading of Rwenkunye –Apac – Lira - Acholibur Road Project ) in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) as amended, the National Audit Act 2008, the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (IESBA Code) together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the financial statements in Uganda, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements

I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Key Audit Matters

Key audit matters are those matters that, in my professional judgment, are of most significance in my audit of the financial statements of the current period. I have determined that there are no key audit matters to communicate in my report.

Other Matter

I consider it necessary to communicate the following matters other than those presented or disclosed in the financial statements;

1.0

Road sections with pending access issues

Clause 2.1 of the Contract Agreement between UNRA and the Contractors Sadeem Al Kuwait General Trading & contracting company and M/s Gulsan Isaat Sanayi Turizm Nakliyat Ve Ticaret A, States that the Employer (UNRA) shall give the Contractor











right of access to and possession of, all parts of the site within the time (or times) stated in the Contract data in accordance with the program submitted under sub- clause 8.3 [Program].

I noted that there were still some sections of the road that have pending access issues that need to be addressed. These are summarized in the Table below;

No	Section of the road	Nature of claim	
1.	26 +000 to 28 + 000	Palm trees still hindering access to the contractor	
2.	110 + 700 to 111 + 500	Land owners stoppedresolving of compensation disputesthe contractor. Awaiting	
3.	108 + 300 to 108 + 600	Landresolving of compensation disputesowners stopped the contractor. Awaiting	
4	125 + 900 to 125 + 940	Landresolving of compensation disputes.owners stopped the contractor. Awaiting	




This was attributed to slow progress in negotiations to take possession of the project land which has affected implementation of project activities.

The Accounting Officer explained that their Land Acquisition Team was on ground to follow-up all the cases of encumbered sections to ensure that they are resolved in a timely manner and indicated that, in the meantime the Contractors have been granted access to adequate sections of the site where the works are ongoing while the encumbered sections are being resolved and access granted to the Contractors progressively.

I advised the Accounting Officer to resolve all the outstanding access to site issues observed at the different road sections as soon as possible to minimize delays to project implementation.

2.0 Site Possession

The Employer shall give the contractor the right to access, and possession of the site within such time as required to enable the contractor to proceed without disruptions in accordance with the program submitted under sub- clause 8.3 (Program).

The Employer is expected to expedite this exercise and engage PAPs to ensure the Contractor accesses work areas, even as they await compensation.

The contractor on Lot 1 has so far been provided right of way for 67.55 of the project corridor. It was initially anticipated that the remaining sections of the site would be handed over progressively in line with contract provisions of sub – clause 2.1 of the conditions. By now the contractor should have obtained 100% of right of way as per contract obligations. However, the land acquisition team is on site to gain access to the remaining 32.45% road sketches from 61 + 400 to 90+ 00. This was in reference to employer’s letter Ref. UNRA/WORKS/2016-17/00002/01 For Lot 2 the contractor was given possession from Km90+900 to km 130 including additional swamps in second section. This is about 41% of the project corridor. Ref letter UNRA /WORKS/2016-17/000002/02.











Ref to the table below;

No.	Section		DatePossessionofSite	
	From	To		
1.	61 + 400	90 + 900	23/03/2022	
2.	90 + 900 -	130	21/06/2022	




The delayed site possession has been attributed to the land acquisition process; this has an effect on the implementation of the road works for the project.

Management explained that it was practically difficult to achieve 100% compensation rate before issuing commencement orders to the Contractors.

I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that following completion of project feasibility studies the resettlement action plan is implemented and completed with all the affected community and land owners (PAPs) compensated before Contractors are issued with commencement orders. Meanwhile UNRA management should resolve all the outstanding land issues to avoid further losses in order to acquire all the required right of way for implementation of project road works.

3.0

Implementation of Quantified outputs

Section 13 (15, b) of the PFMA 2015 states that a policy statement submitted by a vote shall contain the annual and three months’ work plans, outputs, targets and performance indicators of the work plans. Regulation 11 (3) of PFMR 2016 requires that a vote prepares a work plan that indicates the outputs of the vote for the financial year; the indicators to be used to gauge the performance of the outputs and funds allocated to each activity.

I assessed the implementation of the two (2) outputs that were quantified and noted the following; i. Preparation and implementation of Environment and social safeguards plans were fully implemented (100%). ii. Out of the planned acquisition of 447.63 Hectares of land, only 371 Hectares were acquired representing 83% implementation status.

Below is a table showing level of implementation of fully Quantified outputs:

	Planned Project Activities for F/Y 2021/22	Budgeted/Planned Outputs	Actual Output - Nos	Status in %age	Unit measure (UOM)of	
1.0	447.63 Hectares of land acquired for Right of Way (ROW)	447.63	371	83%	Hectares acquired	
2.0	Preparation implementation Environment safeguards planand of and social	1	1	100%	Approved plan	




Delays in the land acquisition was attributed to inadequate releases by MoFPED which affects implementation of the project objectives.

Management explained that the Contractors currently have been granted possession of adequate sections of the site where the works are being executed.











I advised the Accounting officer to follow-up on the above and addresses issues relating to PAPs as a mitigation measure to attain delivery of project objectives.

4.0

Titling of Road Project Land

Section 16.13.11 of the Treasury Instructions 2017 states that for land, a government entity shall be considered to have control if it has the title. If the government entity does not have title to the land, the entity shall not be considered to have control (the title of government land is usually with the Uganda Land Commission).

I noted that acquisition of titles (i.e. legal ownership) for the acquired land (Upgrading Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira Achoilibur road having a total length of Rwenkunye – Apac Road 91Km), Apac – Lira 100.1km) for which compensation had been made is still in process. However, it was not clear how far the process had reached and when it would end.

Acquisition of Title was affected by the availability of resources to respective MZO’s to speed up the process, Accordingly the Slow process of subdividing titles is affecting project progress.

The Accounting Officer explained that, titling of the road project shall be undertaken at the tail end when all the required road project land has been acquired

I advised the Accounting Officer to follow up this matter with the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development (MoLHUD) and the Chief Government Valuer and have the titling of road project land fast tracked.

5.0

Mobilization of Road Construction Equipment

Clause 6.10 of the Contract Agreement between UNRA and Contractor Sadeem Al Kuwait General Trading and contracting company and Guisan Insaat Sanayi Turizm Nakliyat VeTicaret A.S. the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer, details showing the number of each class of Contractor’s Personnel and each type of Contractor’s Equipment on the site. Details shall be submitted each calendar month, in a form approved by the Engineer, until the Contractor has completed all work which is known to be outstanding at the completion date stated in the Taking-over Certificate for the Works.

A review of the monthly progress report as at June 2022 revealed that the Contractor’s equipment mobilization on site stood as the table below;

Table 1 Mobilization of Equipment status report as at June 2022 Monthly progress report

S/No	Description	Planned mobilization of equipment	Actual mobilization of equipment	Percentage mobilization of equipment	
1	Mobilization of units for Lot 1	143	107	74%	
2	Mobilization of units for Lot 2	155	148	95%	














The contractors are fully equipped but the work progress is minimal, the contractors explained that machinery mobilization depends on the activities being carried out other than of keeping such high volume assets, idle at the site.

The Accounting Officer acknowledged the audit observations and indicated that, The Contractors’ mobilization status is evaluated on a monthly basis and reported in the Consultant’s Monthly Progress Report. The reports show that the Contractor is adequately mobilized on site.

I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that an evaluation of the contractor’s mobilization status throughout the project duration to-date is carried out and where found to be inadequate, punitive measures in line with the contract are taken

Other Information

The Accounting Officer is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Management report, statement of responsibilities of Accounting Officer for the Financial Statements, and other supplementary information. The other information does not include the financial statements and my auditors’ report thereon. My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the road project financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially consistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work I have performed, I conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information; I am required to report that fact.

I have nothing to report in this regard.

Management Responsibilities for the Financial Statements

Under Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 (as amended) and Section 45 of the PFMA, 2015, the Accounting Officer is accountable to Parliament for the funds and resources of UNRA.

The Accounting Officer is also responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in accordance with the accounting policies described in notes to the Financial Statements and the Islamic Development Bank Financing Agreement. This responsibility includes; designing, implementing and maintaining internal controls relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error; selecting and applying appropriate accounting policies; and making accounting estimates that are reasonable in the circumstances.

In preparing the financial statements, the Accounting Officer is responsible for assessing Project’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting, unless the entity’s management either intend to liquidate the Authority or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so. The Accounting Officer is responsible for overseeing the Authority’s financial reporting process.











Auditor’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements

My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement, when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users, taken on the basis of these financial statements. As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, I exercise professional judgement and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:  Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.  Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Project’s internal control.  Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the management.  Conclude on the appropriateness of Managements use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Project’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Project to cease to continue as a going concern.  Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.  I communicate with the Accounting Officer regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.

I also provide the Accounting Officer with a statement that I have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on my independence, and where applicable, related safeguards.

From the matters communicated with the Accounting Officer, I determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. I describe these matters in my auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, I determine that a matter should not be communicated in my report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.











Other Regulatory and Reporting Requirements

In accordance with Section 19 (1) of the National Audit Act, 2008, and Section 3.01, b (i) of the project agreement between IDB and bank of Uganda requires that the Project Implementing Entity shall have its Financial Statements audited by Independent Auditors acceptable to the Agency, in accordance with acceptable consistently applied auditing standards. In carrying out the audit, I have considered and report to you, on the following matters; a) I obtained all the information and explanations which to the best our knowledge and belief where necessary for the purpose of our audit.

b) In my opinion, proper books of account have been kept by the UNRA project management, so far as appears from examination of the books of account.

c) The project Financial Statements are in agreement with the books of account.

Internal Controls

As part of my audit scope and in accordance with International Standards on Auditing, I considered internal controls relevant to UNRA in the preparation and fair presentation of upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira – Acholibur Road Project financial statements for the year ended 30 th June 2022, in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate. Other than the matters referred to in the report, the Internal Control structure for Regrading and Upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira – Acholibur Road Project, was found to be appropriate.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

18 th May, 2023











REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON STATEMENTS OF FUNDS RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE FOR UPGRADING OF RWENKUNYE – APAC – LIRA – ACHOLIBUR

ROAD PROJECT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2022

Opinion

I have audited the Statements of Expenditure (SOE) for upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira - Achoilbur Road Project for the year ended 30 th June, 2022. The Statement of Fund Receipt and Expenditure comprise of the expenditures for all the funds received and expensed by the project for the year ended 30 th June 2022.

In my opinion, the expenditures reimbursed on the basis of Statements of Funds, Receipt and Expenditure are eligible to Bank financing and Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, and the expenditures have been appropriately reflected on the Periodic Financial Statements of Regrading and upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira - Achoilbur Road Project Road Project for the year ended 30 th June,2022.

Project Management’s responsibility for the Statement of Expenditure

UNRA is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the Statements of Expenditure in accordance with the requirements of IDB and the project agreement. This responsibility includes designing, implementing and maintaining internal controls relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatements, whether due to fraud and error; selecting and applying appropriate accounting policies and making accounting estimates that are reasonable in the circumstances.

Auditor’s responsibility

My responsibility is to express an opinion on the Statements of Expenditure based on my audit. I conducted my audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs) and the requirements of IDB. The standards require that I comply with ethical requirements and plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the Statements of Expenditure are free from material misstatements.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

18 th May, 2023











REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE SPECIAL ACCOUNT FOR UPGRADING OF RWENKUNYE – APAC – LIRA – ACHOLIBUR ROAD PROJECT FOR THE YEAR

ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2022

Opinion

I have audited the Special Account (SA) for upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira - Achoilbur Road Project for the year ended 30 th June, 2022 UG 1030. The Special Account comprises of the funds received from IDB and GOU, transfers to operational bank accounts and other direct payments to suppliers for the year ended 30th June 2022.

In my opinion, for the period ended 30 th June 2022, UNRA Project Management has kept the Special Account (SA) in accordance with the terms of the financing agreement and in line with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.

Project Management’s responsibility for the Special Account

UNRA is responsible for maintaining the operations on the special account held in the Central Bank, in accordance with the requirements of IDB and the Project Agreement. This responsibility includes designing, implementing and maintaining internal controls to ensure that only eligible expenditure is made from this account, preparation of reconciliation statements relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatements whether due to fraud and error; selecting and applying appropriate accounting policies and making accounting estimates that are reasonable in the circumstances.

Auditor’s Responsibility

My responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on my audit. I conducted my audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing ISAs and the requirements of IDB. The standards require that I comply with ethical requirements and plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from material misstatements.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

18 th May, 2023











REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE INTERNAL CONTROLS FOR UPGRADING OF RWENKUNYE – APAC – LIRA – ACHOLIBUR ROAD PROJECT FOR

THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2022

Opinion

I have audited the financial statements of upgrading of Rwenkunye – Apac – Lira - Achoilbur Road Project for the year ended 30 th June, 2022 and reviewed the internal control procedures relevant to generation of accounting information presented in the financial statements, and those relevant to control over project finances and the safeguard of its assets. I obtained all the information and explanation I considered necessary for the audit.

In my opinion, UNRA Project Management maintained an adequate internal control system for the preparation of reliable financial statements, control over finances and safeguard of the projects assets during the year ended 30 th June 2022.

Management Responsibility

Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal control structure. In fulfilling this responsibility, estimates and judgment are required to assess the expected benefits and related costs of internal control structure policies and procedures.

Auditor’s Responsibility

My examination was made in accordance with ISAs and accordingly included such tests of the accounting records, verification of assets and liabilities and such other auditing procedures I considered necessary in the circumstances.

For the purpose of this report, I have classified the significant internal control structure policies and procedures in the following categories: -

- Control over preparation of withdrawal applications for funds from the project account

- Bank and cash purchases and payments,
- Monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

For all the internal control structure categories listed above, I obtained an understanding of the design of the relevant policies and procedures and whether they have been placed in operation and I assessed control risk.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

18 th May, 2023











