THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT/ ASSESSMENT REPORT ON A SAMPLE OF SELECTED URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED BY GULU MUNICIPAL COUNCIL IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

Construction of Sir Samuel Baker Road (USMID) Rehabilitation of Badrudin and Gulu-Gulu Roads

(URF)

FINAL REPORT











TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acronyms - 3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY - 4
CHAPTER ONE - 1
  1.0 INTRODUCTION - 1
  1.1 Background - 1
  1.2 USMID AF Program Objective - 1
  1.3 Audit Main Objective - 1
  1.4 Audit Scope - 2
  1.5 Projects selected - 2
CHAPTER TWO - 3
  2.0 AUDIT METHODOLOGY - 3
  2.1 Assessment of Economy - 3
  2.2 Assessment of Efficiency - 3
  2.3 Assessment of Effectiveness - 4
  2.4 Scoring Criteria for Assessment Tool - 5
  2.5 Weighting - 1
  2.6 Selection of Projects - 1
CHAPTER THREE - 2
  3.0 DETAILED FINDINGS PER PROJECT - 2
3.1 Project Title: Construction of the following roads to Bitumen Standard (A total of
9 07km) under USMID Batch-2 - 2
    3.1.1 Contract Details - 2
    3.1.2 Scope of Works - 3
    3.1.3 Status of the project at the time of audit - 3
    3.1.4 Assessment of Economy - 6
    3.1.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 8
    3.1.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 14
3.2 Project Title: Rehabilitation of Badrudin Road (0.290Km) and Gulu-Gulu Road
(0.310Km) - 21
    3.2.1 Contract Details - 21
    3.2.2 Scope of Works - 21
    3.2.3 Status of the project at the time of audit - 21
    3.2.4 Assessment of Economy - 22
    3.2.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 24
    3.2.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 45
3.3 Project Title: Construction of 1block of 2 Units Teacher’s House at Pece primary
school - 51
    3.3.1 Contract Details - 51
    3.3.2 Scope of Works - 51
    3.3.3 Status of the project at the time of Audit - 51
    3.3.4 Assessment of Economy - 52
    3.3.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 54
    3.3.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 59
  3.4 Project Title: Renovation of Sacred Heart S.S Dormitory - 63
    3.4.1 Contract Details - 63
    3.4.2 Scope of Works - 63
    3.4.3 Status of the project at the time of audit - 63
    3.4.4 Assessment of Economy - 64
    3.4.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 65
    3.4.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 70
3.5 Project Title: Construction of 2-unit Teacher’s house & flush toilet at Christ Church p/s74
    3.5.1 Contract details - 74











    3.5.2 Scope of Works - 74
    3.5.3 Status of the project at the time of audit - 74
    3.5.4 Assessment of Economy - 75
    3.5.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 78
    3.5.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 84
  3.6 Project Title: Completion of Pece division office block - 88
    3.6.1 Contract Details - 88
    3.6.2 Scope of Works - 88
    3.6.3 Status of the project at the time of audit - 88
    3.6.4 Assessment of Economy - 88
    3.6.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 89
    3.6.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 93
APPENDIX 1: PROJECT SCORE CARD - 98











ACRONYMS

BoQs	Bills of Quantities	
CBR	California Bearing Ratio	
Ch.	Chainage	
CML	Central Materials Laboratory	
CRR	Crushed Rock	
DBST	Double Bituminous Surface Treatment	
DCP	Dynamic Cone Penetrometer	
DDEG	Discretional Development Equalisation Grant	
DLP	Defects Liability Period	
DSD	Double Surface Dressing	
ESIA	Environmental and Social Impact Assessment	
FY	Financial year	
GCC	General Conditions of Contract	
GoU	Government of Uganda	
HRS	Hours	
IDA	International Development Bank	
IPCs	Interim Payment Certificates	
KM	Kilometre	
LGs	Local Governments	
MDD	Maximum Dry Density	
ME	Municipal Engineer	
MLHUD	Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development	
mm	Millimetre	
OAG	Office of the Auditor General	
OHS	Operational Safety and Health	
PAC	Public Accounts Committee	
PDU	Procurement and Disposal Unit	
PST	Project Support Team	
SC	Supervising Consultant	
SCC	Special Conditions of Contract	
SFG	School Facilitation Grant	
TDG	Transitional Development Grant	
ToRs	Terms of Reference	
UGX	Uganda Shillings	
URF	Uganda Road fund	
URF	Uganda Road Fund	
USD	US Dollars	
USMID – AF	Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding	
VAT	Value Added Tax	
VFM	Value for Money	
VIP	Ventilated Improved Pit Latrine	
WB	World Bank	














EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Government of Uganda represented by Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) is securing an additional financing facility of USD 360 million from the International Development Association (IDA/World Bank) to finance Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development-Additional Financing (USMID-AF) Program. During the second year of the program 2019/2020, the program participating municipalities were increased to twenty-two municipal councils which include; Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Lira, Apac, Soroti, Moroto, Mbale, Tororo, Busia, Kamuli, Jinja, Lugazi, Entebbe, Hoima, Mubende,

Fortportal, Kasese, Mbarara, Ntungamo, Kabale and Masaka.

One of the conditions of effectiveness of the program is for government to have in place complete annual performance assessment. Accordingly, as part of this requirement, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) requested the Auditor General to carry out a Value for Money Audit/Assessment for USMID and non-USMID infrastructure projects implemented in the Financial Year 2018/19 in the 22 Municipalities that shall participate in the USMID-AF implementation during the FY2019/20.

The main objective is to undertake a Value for Money Assessment of the delivery of urban infrastructure undertaken by the municipal councils participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Additional Funding Program (USMID-AF). The scope of the assessment covered a selected sample of six (6) infrastructure projects inclusive of USMID and a selected sample of non-USMID i.e., Uganda Road Fund (URF) funded projects, and Schools Facilities Grant (SFG) or Transitional Development Grant (TDG) or Discretional Development Equalisation Grant (DDEG) funded projects; implemented in the participating municipalities in the Financial Year 2018/2019. The general approach was to audit, for each Municipality One (1) USMID Project and Five (5) Non-USMID Projects (3 URF Projects and 2 SFG/TDG/DDEG Projects). Specifically, roads and building projects were considered for this audit.

A participatory approach with the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD- USMID PST), Municipalities and World Bank was adopted. Project documents including planning estimates, designs, procurement files, works/ material supply contracts, progress reports, payment certificates, vouchers, quality control documents, correspondences and minutes of management meetings were reviewed. Field inspections were undertaken jointly with representatives of the Municipality for the selected projects to verify time, cost, quality, quantity and functionality of the civil works.











Audited projects in FY 2018/2019

Ser. No.	Project	Amount (UGX)	Weights (%)	Funding Arrangements	
1	Construction of the following roads to Bitumen Standard (A total of 9.07km) under USMID Batch-2: See separate list (13 Roads)	42,187,329,051	96.48%	USMID	
2	Rehabilitation of Badrudin Road (0.290Km) and Gulu-Gulu Road (0.310Km)	1,094,579,093	2.50%	URF	
3	Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher's House at Pece Primary School	76,731,100	0.18%	SFG	
4	Renovation of Sacred Heart SSS Dormitory	219,944,910	0.50%	DDEG	
5	Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher's House plus 2 stances pour flash toilet at Christ Church Primary School	90,071,000	0.21%	SFG	
6	Completion of Pece Division Office Block	59,030,475	0.13%	Local Revenue	
TOTAL		43,727,685,629	100.00%		




The audit also identified some areas that required improvement in order to strengthen the institutional capacity and improve urban infrastructure delivery at the municipalities in

Uganda

This report presents the results of the assessment and the summary of the findings for the Financial Year 2018/2019. Chapter 2 presents the approach and methodology used for the assessment and Chapter 3 presents the findings per project in the municipality.

RESULTS OF ASSESSMENT AND KEY FINDINGS

Based on the approach and procedures performed, the assessment of economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which the urban infrastructure was delivered in Gulu Municipality in the Financial Year 2018/2019 yielded a weighted score 67.24% for the Six (6) selected projects as presented in the table below;

Results of the Assessment

PROJECTS	USMID	Gulu Gulu	DDEG (PECE P/S)	DDEG (SACRED SS)	SFG (CHRIST CHURCH)	DDEG (PECE OFFICE BLOCK	Weighted Score %	
	1	2	3	4	5	6		
Weight (%)	96.48%	2.50%	0.18%	0.50%	0.21%	0.13%		
Economy	21.47	25.71	25.89	N/A	0.00	N/A	21.54	
Efficiency	16.00	14.00	26.00	26.00	8.00	19.00	16.01	
Effectiveness	30.23	13.00	30.00	19.00	17.00	16.00	29.69	
Total	67.70	52.71	81.89	64.29	25.00	50.00	67.24	














Economy Assessment Weighted Score 21.54 out of 30

Economy assessment related to an assessment of the unit cost of delivery of the infrastructure against works of similar quality and quantity. In this assessment, absolute percentage differences between quantities in the Engineer’s Estimates and corresponding Final Implemented quantities for selected items were determined, followed by the absolute percentage differences between Engineer’s Unit Cost and Contracted Unit Cost per square meter of road works/buildings for contracted projects and, finally the absolute percentage differences between Contracted Unit Cost (or Engineer’s Unit cost where applicable) and Final Implemented Unit Cost per square meter of road works/buildings. The absolute percentage differences of these parameters were compared to the maximum allowable percentage difference for the respective parameter to determine the economy score.

In determining the absolute percentage differences between the quantities in the engineer’s estimates and the final implemented quantities for the Municipality, five key items were assessed; -

- USMID funded Roads Projects; Precast concrete class 30 barrier kerbs, Bush Clearing and Grubbing, Crushed Stone Base, Asphalt Concrete for Surfacing, White lines broken or unbroken for road marking.
- USMID funded buildings projects and SFG/DDEG/ TDG projects; Roofing sheets (gauge 28), Internal Plaster, 230mm walling, Roofing timber 100 mm x 50 mm, Reinforced concrete.
- URF funded projects (Force Account); 600mm diameter culverts, Chippings, Fuel, Gravel and Cement.
- URF funded projects (contracted); 600mm diameter culverts, concrete for drains, prime coat, first seal coat and Gravel for subbase.

The weighted economy score of 21.54 out of 30 for the Municipality was due to the observed differences between its planned and executed quantities for the USMID, URF and one DDEG project; and the significant difference between its contracted unit cost and the final unit cost per square meter for the USMID and URF project. These differences are indicative of the Municipality’s inadequacies in quantity and cost estimation for the USMID and URF funded projects. For one SFG project, the engineer’s and implemented quantities were not availed.

Efficiency Assessment Weighted Score 16.01 out of 35











while for the URF project; there was a physical progress lag of 14.5%. All the DDEG projects and one SFG project were completed on time.

Detailed measurement sheets were prepared for only the USMID project. For one SFG project, payment documents were not availed so payments above certified amounts could not be assessed. All other projects had no payments above certified amounts. For one DDEG project, records of certified quantities were not availed of assessment of overpayments could not be done while for the other projects, only the USMID project did not have any overpayment obtained. Audit further established that on the USMID and URF funded projects, some payments were delayed and for one SFG some payment documents were not availed so timeliness in payment could not be assessed. All the other projects had their payments made in time.

For all the Non-USMID projects, it was observed that none of them had quality progress reports on file. One DDEG and one SFG project did not have minutes of site meetings while the other non- USMID projects had. It was also noted that supervising personnel and equipement were mobilised for all the non –USMID projects.

Detailed Completion Certificate accompanied by the snag list for the USMID funded project was missing on the project management file. The audit further noted that as-built drawings for the USMID funded project were also missing. The audit noted that progress monitoring/ reporting during the DLP was not conducted on the USMID project; and the Defects Liability Certificate for the USMID project had been issued by audit time.

The weighted efficiency score of 16.01 out of 35 shows that the municipality still has major challenges in timely delivery of infrastructure, supervision and certification of executed works.

Effectiveness Assessment Weighted Score 29.69 out of 35

Effectiveness involved assessment of the usage and quality of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities. This involved the assessment of quality of works under implementation; the utilisation of infrastructure; and the fulfilment/adequacy of implemented environmental, health, social & safety measures. The team assessed the following parameters; presence of material test results on file, percentage conformance of site works to design drawings and specifications, percentage of conformance of audit test results to specifications, presence of defects from visual observations, observed functionality and usage, and evidence of implemented environmental and social/safety measures for infrastructure.











The score of 29.69 out of 35 shows that the municipality is to a large extent effectively implementing arrangements required to achieve the expected quality and functionality of the infrastructure.

Key Findings per Project

S/No.	Project	Finding	
1	Construction of the following roads to Bitumen Standard (A total of 9.07km) under USMID Batch- 2: See separate list (13 Roads) [USMID]	 The score on economy was 21.47 out of 30.  The municipality’s absolute percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and final implemented quantities for 4 of the 5 items assessed were higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference.  The absolute percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost was 91.12% which was higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference.  The absolute percentage difference between contracted unit cost and final implemented unit cost was 7.61% which was within the allowable percentage difference.  The score on efficiency was 16.00 out of 35.  There was a physical progress lag noted. However, the audit tem could not quantify this lag due to insufficient information.  The auditor observed that detailed measurement sheets were attached to the payment certificates.  Payments to the Contractor and Supervising Consultant were also consistent with the certified amounts.  There were no overpayments.  Review of payment documents revealed that payments for the Contractor’s IPCs No.4, 5, 6, 7 and the Consultant’s Invoive No. 04 were delayed.  There was no certificate of completion on file.  There were no as-built drawings on file.  No progress/ monitoring reports were prepared during the DLP.  The Defects Liability certificate was issued and on file.  The score on effectiveness was 30.23 out of 35  Material test results were on file.  Audit did not conduct any checks for conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications.  Audit did not conduct any material tests.  Minor defects were observed on some of the roads.  At the time of audit, all the 13 roads were fully functional. Minor functionality issues were observed.  There was evidence of satisfactory environmental protection measures.implementation of  There was physical evidence of satisfactory implementation of There was no evidence of implementation of previous auditsocial/safety measures.recommendations  There was an O&M plan for 2019/2020 on file.  There was visual evidence of maintenance activities.	
2	Rehabilitation of Badrudin Road (0.290Km) and Gulu- Gulu Road (0.310Km) [URF]	 The score on economy was 25.71 out of 30  The municipality’s percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and final implemented quantities for concrete class 25 and gravel for sub-base were higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference.  The percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost was 21.67% which was higher	














S/No.	Project	Finding	
than the maximum allowable percentage difference.  The percentage difference between contracted unit cost and final implemented unit cost was 13.00% which was within the allowable percentage difference.  The score on efficiency was 14.00 out of 35.  There was a physical progress lag of 14.5%.  There were no detailed measurement sheets.  Payments to the Contractor were consistent with the certified amounts.  An over payment of UGX 314,489,175 VAT exclusive was made to the Contractor; which is 37.31% of the total certified amount.  70% payment of IPC No. 2 was delayed by 27 days and the remaining 30% had not been paid by audit time.  Three (3) project technical reports of insufficient quality were Two (2) sets of site meeting minutes were found on file.  The Municipal Engineer was appointed as the Contractfound on file.Supervisor.  At the time of audit, the works had not yet been completed and the contractor had mobilized required equipment.  The score on effectiveness was 13.00 out of 35.  No material test results were found on the file.  All the four items checked conformed to the designs and specification.  3 out of the 4 tests conducted passed representing 75% conformance to specifications.  Minor defects were observed.  At the time of audit, the roads were complete and functional. However, the stone pitched drains were incomplete and access culverts were not provided.  There was no satisfactory evidence of implementation of environmental protection measures.  There was no satisfactory evidence of implementation of social/ safety measures.	
3	Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher's House at Pece Primary School [SFG]	 The score on economy was 25.89 out of 30.  The municipality’s absolute percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and final implemented quantities for reinforced concrete was higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference.  The absolute percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost was 1.87% which was within the allowable percentage difference.  The absolute percentage difference between the contracted unit cost and final implemented unit cost was 19.96% which was higher the maximum allowable percentage difference.than The score on efficiency was 26.00 out of 35.  There was no physical progress lag.  Detailed measurement sheets were not prepared.  All the payments made to the Contractor were consistent with There was an overpayment of UGX 646,720 (0.8% of the finalcertified amounts.contract sum).  Payments were made in time.  There were no quality progress reports on file.	














S/No.	Project	Finding	
 Minutes of site meetings were on file.  The Assistant Engineering officer was formally appointed as a project manager to supervise the works.  There was evidence that the required equipment was mobilized during construction.  There was no detailed completion certificate on file.  As-built drawings were not on file.  There were DLP monitoring reports on file.  The Defects Liability Certificate was not issued.  The score on effectiveness was 30.0 out of 35.  There were no material test results on file.  All the items checked revealed 100% conformance to design drawings and specifications.  12 out of 12 audit tests conducted passed, representing 100% conformance to specifications.  Minor defects were observed.  At the time of audit, the construction works were complete, functional and in use.  There was satisfactory evidence of implementation of environmental protection measures.  There was satisfactory evidence of implementation of social/ safety measures.	
4	Renovation of Sacred Heart SSS Dormitory School [DDEG]	project. The score on economy was not applicable for this This project being a renovation project with a unique scope, the comparison could not be made with municipalities that had fresh construction right from the foundation. Therefore, this project will be scored less 30 marks for economy assessment but the final score will be converted to out of 100 marks.  The score on efficiency was 26.00 out of 35.  There was no physical progress lag.  There were no detailed measurement sheets on file.  All the payments made to the contractor were consistent with certified amounts.  An overpayment of UGX 5,794,000 (2.63% of final contract amount was made) was found.  Payments were made in time.  1 out of 4 quality progress reports was available on file.  Minutes of site meetings were present on file.  The Assistant Engineering Officer was formally appointed as a project manager to supervise the works.  There was evidence that the required equipment was mobilized during construction.  There was a completion certificate on file but no snag list was As-built drawings were not prepared.  DLP monitoring report was on file.  The Defects Liability Certificate was not issued by the time of The score on effectiveness was 19.00 out of 35.  There were no material test results on file.  All Items checked conformed to the drawings/ 9 out of 11 audit tests conducted passed, representing 81.82%attached.the audit.the specification.	














S/No.	Project	Finding	
 Minor defects were observed.  At the time of audit inspection, it was observed that the structure was complete and will serve its intended purpose.  There was no satisfactory evidence of implementation of environment protection measures.  There was no evidence of implementation of social/safety measures.conformance.	
5	Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher's House plus 2 stances pour flash toilet at Christ Church Primary School [SFG]	 The score on economy was 0.00 out of 30.  The absolute percentage differences between the quantities in the engineer’s estimate and the final implemented quantities for all the five items was not assessed since engineer’s quantities were not availed to the audit.  The absolute percentage difference between the engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost per square meter of infrastructure was not assessed because the Engineer’s estimate was not availed.  The absolute percentage difference between the contracted unit cost and the final implemented unit cost per square meter of final implemented cost was not availed.infrastructure was not assessed because the The score on efficiency was 8.00 out of 35.  The physical progress lag could not be determined due to insufficient information.  Detailed measurement sheets were not on file.  Payments documents were not availed to the audit and so payments above certified amounts could not be assessed.  There was an overpayment of UGX 1,607,380 (1.7% of final contract amount) noted.  Payments documents were not availed to the audit and so timeliness of Payments could not be assessed.  No progress report was found on file.  Minutes of site meetings were not present on file.  The Assistant Engineering Officer was appointed as the project manager to supervise the works.  There was evidence that the required equipment was mobilized during construction.  There was no completion certificate on file.  As-built drawings were not prepared.  DLP monitoring reports were not prepared.  The Defects Liability Certificate was not issued by audit time.  The score on effectiveness was 17.00 out of 35.  Material test results were not on file.  100% of the items checked conformed to the drawings/specifications.  18 out of 23 audit tests conducted passed representing 78.26% conformance to specification.  Minor defects were observed.  At the time of audit, the works were complete and the staff house was functional and in use.  There was no satisfactory evidence of implementation of environment protection measures.  There was no evidence of implementation of social/safety measures.	














S/No.	Project	Finding	
6	Completion of Pece Division Office Block [LOCAL REVENUE]	 The score on economy was not applicable for this project. Economy was not assessed due to uniqueness of this project.  This project being a renovation project with a unique scope, the comparison could not be made with municipalities that had fresh construction right from the foundation. Therefore, this project will be scored less 30 marks for economy assessment but the final score will be converted to out of 100 marks.  The score on efficiency was 19.00 out of 35.  There was no physical progress lag.  There were no measurement sheets on file.  No payments above certified were noted.  Records of certified quantities were not availed and so overpayments could not be assessed.  Payments were made in time.  There were no progress reports on file.  Minutes of site meetings were not present on file.  The Assistant Engineering Officer was appointed as a project manager to supervise the works.  There was evidence that the required equipment was mobilized during construction.  No completion certificate accompanied by a snag list was issued.time. As-built drawings were not prepared.  There were no DLP monitoring reports on file.  The Defects Liability Certificate had not been issued by audit The score on effectiveness was 16.00 out of 35.  Material test results were not on file.  100% of Items checked conformed to specifications/drawings.the 23 out of 29 audit tests conducted passed, representing 79.3% conformance to specifications.  Minor defects were observed.  At the time of audit inspection, the structure was complete and There was no satisfactory evidence of implementation of environment protection measures.  There was no evidence of implementation of social/safetywas in use.measures.  The O & M plan was not availed to the audit  There was visual evidence that maintenance activities such as sweeping and cleaning of the division office block was being done.	














RECOMMENDATIONS USMID Funded Infrastructure

1. Improvement is required during preparation of the engineer’s estimates for future projects.

2. The Municipality should ensure that, for future projects, payments to the Contractor and Consultant are effected timely to avoid associated negative impact on the performance of the contract;

3. The Municipality should always ensure that when there is genuine cause to extend completion time, it is done and properly documented. Should the Contractor fail to complete the works within the approved time for completion, the Municipality should charge the Liquidated Damages as per the Contract provisions. In case of the USMID project, the liquidated damages amounted to UGX 260,994,351 for the delay period from 03 rd November 2018 to 14 th November 2018.

4. The Municipality should improve its document/ records management system to avoid loss of documents and enable easy documents retrieval.

Non-USMID Funded Infrastructure

1. The Municipality should improve on their estimations for probable construction quantities at design/planning stage while preparing engineer’s estimates.

2. The Municipality should put in place measures to ensure that planned works are always completed within the scheduled timelines.

3. The Municipality should ensure that work programmes detailing commencement, and completion dates are prepared before start of works, and regularly updated.

4. The Municipality should ensure that detailed measurements are carried out regularly during works progress for an admeasurement contract and the detailed measurement sheets attached to the payment certificates.

5. For the URF project, the Municipality should carry out re-computation of the Contract Sum using correct dimensions of the road and drainage and revise the Contract Sum from the Contracted UGX 927,609,590 to the actual UGX 529,339,350 VAT exclusive;

6. For the URF project, the Municipality should recover an overpayment of UGX 338,286,211 from the Contractor and the Contractor should re-mobilise and complete the outstanding drainage and ancillary works at no extra cost to the Municipality since the full actual contract amount has already been paid, albeit works not yet fully completed.

7. The Municipality should ensure that good quality progress reports are prepared periodically throughout the contract duration including the extended period, preferably, on a monthly basis and filed on the contract management file.

8. The Municipality should ensure that payments to contractors and suppliers are effected in timely manner per terms of the contracts;

9. The Municipality should ensure that monthly Site Meetings are held and Minutes are prepared, reviewed and signed by all the Parties;











10. The Municipality should always ensure that completion reports are prepared; Completion Certificates are issued; as-built drawings are prepared; final accounts are prepared, reviewed and certified; Defects Liability Certificates are issued upon approval of the final account;

11. Defects and maintenance lapses identified should be rectified;

12. The Municipality should ensure that the planned environmental protection measures are always implemented fully;

John F. S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

2 nd June2021











CHAPTER ONE 1.0 INTRODUCTION

Article 163(3) of the 1995 Constitution of The Republic of Uganda requires the Auditor General (AG) to conduct Financial and Value for Money (VFM) Audits in respect of any project involving public funds. This mandate is further amplified by Section 21 of the National Audit Act (NAA) 2008 which gives the Auditor General powers to conduct financial and value for money audits for purposes of establishing economy, efficiency and effectiveness of any Ministry, Department or Agency (MDA), public organisation and any local government council.

Section 40 of the National Audit Act, 2008, empowers the Auditor General to engage the services of, or work in consultation with Professional or Technical Experts or Consultants whether in the public service or not, to enhance the performance of the OAG. Section III-part C (1) of the Financing Agreement for USMID Program provides for a Value for Money (VFM) audit starting with FY 2014/15 for the program activities under Disbursement Link Indicator 3 (DLI 3). In order to fulfil this condition, MLHUD requested the OAG to conduct a VFM audit on the infrastructure projects.

1.1 Background

Government of Uganda represented by Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) is securing an additional financing facility of USD 360 million from the International Development Association (IDA/World Bank) to finance Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development-Additional Financing (USMID-AF) Program. During the second year of the program 2019/2020, the program participating municipalities were increased to twenty-two municipal councils which include; Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Lira, Apac, Soroti, Moroto, Mbale, Tororo, Busia, Kamuli, Jinja, Lugazi, Entebbe, Hoima, Mubende, Fortportal, Kasese, Mbarara, Ntungamo, Kabale and Masaka.

One of the conditions of effectiveness of the program is for government to have in place complete annual performance assessment. Accordingly, as part of this requirement, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) requested the Auditor General to carry out a Value for Money Audit/Assessment for USMID and non-USMID infrastructure projects implemented in the Financial Year 2018/19 in the 22 Municipalities that shall participate in the USMID-AF implementation during the FY2019/20.

1. Economy Assessment: This focused on the quantity, quality and unit cost of the infrastructure and making comparison with similar infrastructure designed and implemented in another municipality or sector.











2. Efficiency Assessment: This focused on the time taken to deliver a given quantity and quality of an infrastructure and included but was not be limited to: a. Evaluation of the level of implementation of works against agreed contract timelines; b. Evaluation of existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works. c. Review of contract supervision and monitoring arrangements during construction or project closure, as applicable, and recommend measures needed to address shortcomings in execution of the contracts.

3. Effectiveness Assessment: This focused on the extent to which the works were delivered with the intended quality and meet the intended purpose and usage. It also covered an assessment of fulfilment of environmental, health, social and safety safeguards.

1.4 Audit Scope

The audit focused on the USMID project and a sample of other non-USMID financed projects undertaken in the FY 2018/2019 based on the work plan.

1.5 Projects selected

Six (6) projects were selected for audit review comprising one (1) USMID project, one (1) URF project, two (2) SFG projects and one (1) DDEG project. The following table shows projects selected and their corresponding weights for Gulu Municipality, in the Financial Year 2018/2019;

Table 1.5-1: Selected Infrastructure projects

SNo.	Project	Amount (UGX)	Weights (%)	Arrangement of funding (USMID, URF or SFG)	
1	Construction of the following roads to Bitumen Standard (A total of 9.07km) under USMID Batch-2: See separate list (13 Roads)	42,187,329,051	96.48%	USMID	
2	Rehabilitation of Badrudin Road (0.290Km) and Gulu-Gulu Road (0.310Km)	1,094,579,093	2.50%	URF	
3	Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher's House plus 2 stances pour flash toilet at Christ Church Primary School	90,071,000	0.21%	SFG	
4	Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher's House at Pece Primary School	76,731,100	0.18%	SFG	
5	Completion of Pece Division Office Block	59,030,475	0.13%	Local Revenue	
6	Renovation of Sacred Heart SSS Dormitory	219,944,910	0.50%	DDEG	
TOTAL		43,727,685,629	100.00%		














CHAPTER TWO

2.0 AUDIT METHODOLOGY

The audit was carried out in accordance with the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) Performance Auditing Standards and Value for money (VFM) Auditing guidelines prescribed in the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) VFM audit manual.

The standards require that the audit is planned in a manner which ensures that an audit of high quality is carried out in an economic, efficient and effective way, and in a timely manner.

The audit was based on a Value for Money (VFM) assessment tool that evaluated economy, efficiency and effectiveness to ensure attainment of the specific audit objectives. This tool was developed in consultation with USMID Program Support

Team and the World Bank.

2.1 Assessment of Economy

In the assessment of economy, the variations in the quantities and Unit Cost of infrastructure were considered. The following parameters were compared with the audit maximum permissible variation;

- Percentage difference (%) between the quantities in the engineer’s estimates and final implemented quantities;
- Percentage difference (%) between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost; however, this was not applied on force on account projects.
- Percentage difference (%) between the contracted unit cost and the final implemented unit cost. For force account projects, the Engineer’s unit cost was compared with the final implemented unit cost. In the computation of the unit cost per square meter for road works, Preliminary and General Items, and earthworks were excluded; while for buildings, only Preliminary and General items were excluded. The documents reviewed for this assessment included but were not limited to; Engineers’ estimates, works contracts, payment certificates, material supplies contracts, and force account planning and reporting documentation.

2.2 Assessment of Efficiency

In the assessment of efficiency, the following was undertaken:











For USMID projects which were previously audited while under construction; and at the time of this current audit were already in the DLP or beyond; these parameters were substituted by the corresponding assessment parameters in (iv) below:

iv.

A review of the contract supervision and monitoring arrangements during project closure; In undertaking this review, an assessment was made of presence of detailed Completion Certificate/ Taking-Over Certificate, the presence of as-built drawings and maintenance manuals, the number and quality of DLP progress/ monitoring reports prepared, presence of the Defects Liability Certificate.

The documents reviewed for this assessment included; works contracts, consultancy contracts, payment certificates, fee notes and vouchers, measurement sheets, time sheets, work programs, progress reports, minutes of site meetings, material delivery notes, material supplies contracts, force account planning & reporting documentation, contract correspondences files, taking-over certificates & snag lists, practical completion reports, defects monitoring/ progress reports, final completion reports, as- built drawings, defects liability certificates, among others.

Field inspections and measurement of some of the certified works was undertaken and quantities of sampled works measured were compared to respective quantities certified for payment so as to assess the valuation of the works.

2.3 Assessment of Effectiveness

The assessment of effectiveness focused on the quality and usage of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities. The following were undertaken;

i.

An assessment of the quality of works under implementation; this was assessed by checking for the presence of material test results, comparing site works to the design requirements, comparing audit material test results of sampled items to specifications, and visually checking for the presence of any defects on the works.

ii.

An assessment on the utilisation of the infrastructure; this involved undertaking site visits to assess the usage and functionality of the infrastructure. iii. An assessment of the fulfilment/ adequacy of implemented environmental, Health, social & safety measures. This involved undertaking site visits to ascertain the evidences of implemented environmental and social/safety measures for infrastructure.











2.4 Scoring Criteria for Assessment Tool

The following scoring tool in table 2.4-1 below was used to assess projects executed in the municipality. Detailed scoring for the economic aspect of the municipalities is in tables 2.4-2 and 2.4-3 further below.

Table 2.4-1: Assessment Tool Criteria

No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Scoring Criteria	Remarks	
1	To assess the unit cost of delivery of the infrastructure against works of similar nature (Economy) Max points - 30	To assess the variation in planned and executed quantities across municipalities (10 Marks)	% difference between the quantities in the engineer’s estimates and final implemented quantities. (10 Marks)	Difference(F) ≤25% – 2mks; otherwise, apply formula S=2*25/F where F is the absolute % difference of a particular item for the Municipality under consideration	See table 2.4.2 for the Basis of the Scoring Criteria; and Table 2.4.3 for the Scoring Criteria for the Economy Parameters	
		To assess the variation in unit prices for works of similar nature (20 Marks)	% difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost (5 Marks)	Difference(F) ≤15% – 5mks; otherwise, apply formula S=5*15/F where F is the absolute % difference of the unit costs		
			% difference between the contracted unit cost and the final unit cost (15 Marks)	Difference(F) ≤15% – 15mks; otherwise, apply formula S=15*15/F where F is the absolute % difference of the unit costs		
2	To assess the level of implementation of the works against the agreed contract approved work programs and outputs (Efficiency) Max points – 35	To assess the progress of the works against time (10 Marks)	Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress) (10 Marks)	Physical lag ≤ 5% - 10mks; >5% - ≤ 10% -8mks; >10% - ≤ 20% -6mks; >20% - ≤ 25% -4mks; >25% - ≤ 30% -2mk; above 30% - 0mks		
		To assess the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works (18 Marks)	Presence of detailed measurement sheets (2 Marks)	Detailed measurement sheets present – 2mks; Absent – 0mks	Assessment for USMID projects to be undertaken on only IPCs not reviewed in the previous audits	
			Payment above certified amounts (IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices etc.) (3 Marks)	No payment above certified amount – 3mks; Any payment above certified amount -0mks		
			% of overpayment (as a result of variance between audit values and certified works) to the certified value of the works (10 Marks)	0% overpayment -10mks; 1% - ≤5% - 5mks; 6 - ≤10% - 2mks; above 10% - 0mks		
			Timeliness in payment of IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices etc. (3 Marks)	Payment within contractual provision – 3mks; Otherwise – 0mks		
		To Review contract Supervision and monitoring	% of quality progress reports prepared (2 Marks)	100% reports – 2mks; otherwise - 0mks	hese parameters will be assessed fromthe date of the last assessment toT	
			Presence of Minutes of Site	Minutes of site meetings present –		




5











No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Scoring Criteria	Remarks	
arrangements (7 Marks)	Meetings (2 Marks)	2mks; Absent – 0mks	completion (for USMID projects) I f the parameters were adequately assessed in the previous VFM USMID audit, this shall be stated and the scores of these shall be transferred to the parameters below (Shaded part)	
	% of approved supervising personnel on site (2 Marks)	100% personnel – 2mks; otherwise - 0mk		I f the parameters were adequately assessed in the previous VFM USMID audit,	
	% of approved equipment on site (1 Mark)	100% equipment – 1mk; otherwise - 0mk		this shall be stated and the scores of these shall be transferred to the parameters below (Shaded part)	
	To Review contract Supervision and monitoring arrangements during project closure (7 Marks)	Presence of detailed certificate of completion and snag list (2 Marks)	Detailed certificate of completion present -2mks; otherwise 0mks	Detailed certificate of completion stating the actual completion date and hence commencement of DLP period, accompanied by a snag list or activities to be completed	
		Presence of As-built drawings and maintenance manuals (2 marks)	As-built drawings present – 2mks; otherwise 0mks	Submitted complete as built drawings and maintenance manuals for installations such as street lamps and traffic lights	
		% of quality DLP progress/monitoring reports (2 Marks)	100% reports present 2mks; otherwise 0mks	DLP monitoring reports prepared at least on quarterly basis	
		Presence of Defects Liability Certificate (1 mark)	Defects Liability Certificate present 1mk; otherwise 0mks	DLC certificate indicating satisfactory completion of the DLP	
3	To assess the usage and quality of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities (effectiveness) Max points - 35	To assess the quality of works under implementation (19 Marks)	Material test results on file (3 Marks)	Material test results present – 3; Absent - 0	I f previously adequately assessed, marksto be distributed to other parameters	
			% conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications (5 Marks)	100% conformance – 5mks; 99% - ≥80% - 3mks; 79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk		
			% conformance of audit test results to specifications (8 Marks)	100% conformance – 8mks; 99% - ≥80% - 3mks; 79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk		
			Presence of defects from visual observations (3 Marks)	No defects observed – 3; Minor defects observed – 2; Major defects observed - 0		
		To assess the utilization of the infrastructure (10 Marks)	Observed Functionality and Usage (10 Marks)	Functioning and used as intended – 10mks; below – pro-rata basing on team judgement	Observed Usage; Is the infrastructure being used as intended; Functionality; Assess the functionality of the different aspects of the infrastructure e . g . f or USMID roads – functionality of the s i de drains, culvert lines, street lights, road markings, bins etc.	
		To assess the fulfilment/ adequacy of	Evidence of implemented environmental and social/safety	Physical evidence of satisfactory implementation of environmental	 Observe whether landscaping and tree p l anting have been satisfactorily	




6











No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Scoring Criteria	Remarks	
implemented environmental, Health, social & safety measures (6 marks)	measures for infrastructure (6 marks)	protection measures – 3mks; Otherwise 0 Physical evidence of satisfactory implementation of social/ safety measures -3mks, otherwise 0	undertaken as required;  Assess presence of speed control devices at junctions and at busy crossing points such as schools, hospitals etc.  Assess presence of infrastructure to enable persons with special needs; textured paving blocks, sonant s i gnalized junctions, ramped accesses a t junctions, placement of road s i gnage/posts on walkways, evenness o f sidewalks, width of sidewalks, presence of protruding manhole covers  Inspect borrow pits to check whether they have been satisfactorily restored  For buildings, check whether provisions have been made for use by people with special needs  In addition, assess whether gender considerations have been made for buildings	
		To assess the extent of O&M for completed facilities	% of key audit recommendations implemented	Level of implementation of key audit recommendations >90%: Outstanding; >70% but <= 90%: Satisfactory; >50% but <=70%: Unsatisfactory; <=50%: Unacceptable	Evidence of actions taken on key audit recommendations regarding timeliness, cost and quality of the works	
			Evidence of planning and budgeting for O&M activities	O&M Plans and Budget Available: Outstanding; O&M Plans and Budget Not Available: Unacceptable	Documented evidence indicating planning and budgeting for O&M operations for completed works	
			Visual evidence of maintenance activities	Identified Maintenance activities fully implemented: Outstanding; Identified Maintenance Activities partially implemented: Needs Improvement Identified Maintenance Activities not implemented at all: Unacceptable	V i sually observe routine manual maintenance activities such as sweeping, removal of debris etc. V i sually inspect and assess the state of the drains, drain inlets, functionality of street l i ghts, road markings, vegetative growth on l andscaped sections and state of garbage b i ns	




7











Table 2.4-2: Basis of the Assessment Criteria/methodology for the Economy Parameters

S/N	Economy Parameter	Basis of Scoring Criteria	
1	% difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and Final Implemented quantities {10 marks spread across 5 selected BoQ Items}	Basis: PPDA Law on Changes in Bills of Quantities as contained in the Standard Bidding Document for Works, Section 7: General Conditions of Contract for the Procurement of Works; as follows:47. Changes in the Bill of Quantities or Activity ScheduleOption 1: Admeasurement Contracts – Changes in the Bill of Quantities 47.1 If the final quantity of the work done differs from the quantity in the Bill of Quantities for the particular item by more than 25 percent, provided the change exceeds one percent (1%) of the Initial Contract Price, the Project Manager shall adjust the rate to allow for the change.assessing the parameter for % difference between quantities in the Engineer’s Estimate (and therefore the contract as applicable) and Final Implemented quantities, an understanding of the above-cited PPDA Law on changes in Bills of Quantities in the Standard Bidding Document has been considered.Therefore, for Economy Assessment, it can be considered that the Absolute Maximum Allowable % Difference in quantity for an Item in the Bills of Quantities is 25%. The Economy Assessment option adopted follows the criteria below;(i) For a particular BoQ Item, any Municipality with an Absolute % Difference less than or equal to 25% gets the maximum score of 2 for that project item; (ii) Otherwise, the score for the item is computed using the Formula in Table 2.4.3 below.In	
2	% difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost {5 marks}	Basis: PPDA Law on Contract Amendment as contained in the Contracts Regulations 2014; as follows:(1) A change in the contract which increases the price of the original contract beyond 0.1% in the case of a single change or 1% cumulatively shall be effected by amending the contract.(2) The price to be charged by a provider for any related services that might be needed but which were not included in the contract shall be agreed upon in advance by the parties and shall not exceed the prevailing rates charged to other parties by the provider for similar services.(3) Notwithstanding sub regulation (2) a contract amendment for additional quantities of the same items shall use the same or lower unit prices as the original contract.55. Contract Amendment.	




8











S/N	Economy Parameter	Basis of Scoring Criteria	
(4) A single contract amendment shall not increase the total contract price by more than fifteen percent of the original contract price.(5) Where a contract is amended more than once, the cumulative value of all contract amendments shall not increase the total contract price by more than 25% of the original contract price.Consequently, the Economy Assessment Option adopted follows the criteria below: (i) Any Municipality with an Absolute % Difference less than or equal to 15.0% gets the maximum score of 5 for that unit cost difference; (ii) Otherwise the scores for the unit costs are computed using the Formula in Table 2.4-3	
3	Comparison of the % difference between the Contracted unit cost and the Final Implemented unit cost {15 marks}	Basis: PPDA Law on Contract Amendment as contained in the Contracts Regulations 2014; as follows: 55. Contract Amendment.(1) A change in the contract which increases the price of the original contract beyond 0.1% in the case of a single change or 1% cumulatively shall be effected by amending the contract.(2) The price to be charged by a provider for any related services that might be needed but which were not included in the contract shall be agreed upon in advance by the parties and shall not exceed the prevailing rates charged to other parties by the provider for similar services.(3) Notwithstanding sub regulation (2) a contract amendment for additional quantities of the same items shall use the same or lower unit prices as the original contract.(4) A single contract amendment shall not increase the total contract price by more than fifteen percent of the original contract price.(5) Where a contract is amended more than once, the cumulative value of all contract amendments shall not increase the total contract price by more than 25% of the original contract price.In assessing the parameter for % difference between Unit Costs in the Contract and the Final Implementation, an understanding of the above-cited PPDA Law on contract amendment in the Contracts Regulations 2014 has been considered.In application of the above law for scoring the parameter, it is taken that Clause 55 of the PPDA Works Contracts Regulations of 2014 allows a Contract Price to be varied in increments of not more than 0.1% up to a maximum cumulative increment of 1% of the Original Contract Price without need for amending the Contract. The Clause further allows amendment of the Contract in increments of not more than 15% up to a maximum cumulative amount of 25% of the	




9











S/N	Economy Parameter	Basis of Scoring Criteria	
Original Contract Price.The Economy Assessment Option adopted takes the maximum allowable percentage difference as 15% and it follows the criteria below;(i)(ii)Any Municipality with an Absolute percentage difference less than or equal to 15.0% gets the maximum score of 15 for that unit cost difference; Otherwise the scores for the unit costs are computed using the Formula in Table 2.4-3	




10











Table 2.4-3: Assessment Criteria/methodology for the Economy Parameters

S/No	Economy Parameter	Item	Assessment Criteria/methodology	
1	% difference between the quantities in the engineer’s estimates and those finally implemented. (10 Marks)	Item 1	5 items that are common to all USMID & Non USMID Municipal works contracts will be selected and the quantities of these in the engineers’ estimates and those finally implemented shall be compared to determine the absolute % difference between the two. For any of the items, the maximum allowable percentage difference will be taken as 25% and any % differences less or equal to this 25% will be given the maximum score of 2. Otherwise, the score (S) for any item will be computed using the formula; S=2×Fm/F, in which Fm is 25% and F is the absolute % difference of a particular item for the Municipality under consideration. Each of the items selected will be assessed separately across the Municipalities. The total score for this parameter for the municipality is the sum of the scores obtained for all the 5 items selected. In municipalities where detailed engineer’s estimates for some items were not applicable, a conversion factor shall be applied in the respective cases. While municipalities where the detailed engineer’s estimates were applicable but they did not provide them, they shall be scored zero for this parameter.	
		Item 2		
		Item 3		
		Item 4		
		Item 5		
2	% difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost (5 Marks)	Physical cost	The engineer’s and contracted unit cost shall be obtained by respectively dividing the physical cost as per the engineer’s estimates and contracted cost by the respective areas of the works. The engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost shall then be compared to determine the absolute % difference. The maximum allowable percentage difference in unit cost per square meter will be taken as 15.0% and any % differences less or equal to 15.0% will be given the maximum score of 5. Otherwise, the score (S) for the given unit cost difference shall be computed using the formula; 𝐒 = 𝟓 𝐱 𝐅𝐦/𝐅, in which Fm is 15.0% and F is the absolute % difference in unit cost per square meter of the project under consideration.	
		Area		
		Unit cost		
3	% difference between the contracted unit cost and the final unit cost (15 Marks)	Physical cost	The contracted and final unit cost shall be obtained by respectively dividing the physical cost as per the contracted and final cost by the respective areas of the works. The contracted unit cost and the final unit cost shall then be compared to determine the % difference. The maximum allowable % difference in unit cost per square meter will be taken as 15.0% and any % differences less or equal to 15 % will be given the maximum score of 15. Otherwise, the scores (S) for the given unit cost difference shall be computed using the formula; 𝐒 = 𝟏𝟓 𝐱 𝐅𝐦/𝐅, in which Fm is 15.0% and F is the absolute % difference in unit cost per square meter of the project under consideration.	
		Area		
		Unit cost		




11











Table 2.4-4: Items for comparison per project category

S/No. 1	Project Category USMID Road Projects	Item	Items for Comparison	Units	
		Item 1 Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerbs m			
		Item 2 Clearing and Grubbing ha			
		Item 3 CRR for Road Basem3			
		Item 4 Asphalt Concrete for Surfacingm3			
		Item 5 White lines, broken or unbroken m			
Item 1 Roofing Sheets (gauge 28) Item 2 Internal Plaster Item 3 230mm walling Item 4 Roofing Timber 100×50mm Item 5 Reinforced Concretem 2 m 2 m 2 m m 32 USMID Building Projects, & SFG/ DDEG/TDG building projects					
					
					
					
					
Item 1 600mm diameter concrete culverts Item 2 Chippings/ aggregates Item 3 Fuel Item 4 Gravel Item 5 Cementm m 3 Ltr m 3 Bag3 URF (Force Account)					
					
					
					
					
Item 1 600mm culverts Item 2 Concrete for drains Item 3 Prime Coat Item 4 Item 5 Gravel for sub-baseFirst Seal Coatm m 3 Ltr m 2 m 34 URF (Contracted)					
					
					
					
					




2.5 Weighting

Weighting of the projects was done to cater for financial risks associated with the projects giving consideration to infrastructure with a bigger monetary value. Thus, the weighting was done pro-rata to the costs of the infrastructure selected for assessment, using the formula below; Wx=Px/Σ (P1, 2..., N) where Wx is the weight for project x, Px is the project cost and N is the number of projects selected for the audit.

2.6 Selection of Projects

As per the terms of reference (TORs), the selection of audit projects will be limited to twenty-two (22) participating Municipal councils for the financial year 2018/2019.

- Funding arrangements – Projects will be selected basing on their funding arrangements i.e. projects funded by Uganda Road Fund (URF), and School facilitation Grant (SFG), as these programmes cut across all the USMID participating municipalities;
- Materiality – Projects with higher implementation costs have been considered in preference to those with lower costs;
- Type of Infrastructure – Only road and building works related projects have been selected for this assessment.











CHAPTER THREE

3.0

DETAILED FINDINGS PER PROJECT

This section of the report shows the detailed findings per project. The projects presented in this section of the report include USMID, URF, SFG and DDEG projects implemented by Gulu Municipal Council in the FY 2018/2019.

3.1

Project Title: Construction of the following roads to Bitumen Standard (A total of 9.07km) under USMID Batch-2

Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km), Laroo Road (1.96km), Alex Ojara Road (0.68km), Tank Road (0.34km), Brother Reuben Road (0.64km), Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km), Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.27km), Nyerere Avenue (0.88km), Odida Road (0.25km), Timothy Okwera Road (0.42Km), Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km), Golf- course Road (0.45KM) and Peter Paul Opok Road (0.86km).

3.1.1 Contract Details

T able 3.1-1: Project details

Project Reference Number	Gulu- 754/wrks/USMID/16-17/00001	
Executing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Design Consultant	M/S Sileshi Consult in JV with SABA Engineering P.L.C.	
Project Manager	The Municipal Engineer, Gulu Municipal Council	
Supervising/Design Review Consultant	UB Consulting Engineers Ltd	
Original Supervision Consultancy Amount	UGX 819,864,000 Incl. 18% VAT; (UGX 694,800,000 Excl. 18% VAT)	
Revised Supervision Consultancy Amount (Addendum No.1 sighed on 10 th August 2018)	UGX 930,489,000 Incl, 18% VAT.) UGX 788,550,000 Excl. VAT {Additional UGX 93,750,000 in respect of design and supervision of extension of Laroo Road by 530m length}	
Contractor	Chongqing International Construction Corporation (CICO)	
Original Contract Amount	UGX: 50,502,484,790; Incl. 18% VAT and 10% Contingencies	
Original Contract Amount	UGX: 43,499,058,548.7; Excl. 18% VAT but Incl. 10% Contingencies	
Revised Contract Amount (September 2017 Design Review)	UGX: 42,579,394,198; Excl. 18% VAT but Incl. Contingencies	
Corrected Revised Contract Amount (11 th July 2018)	UGX: 42,579,553,237; Excl. 18% VAT but Incl. Contingencies	
Works Contract Signing Date	09 th August 2017	
Commencement Date	14 th August 2017	
Original Time for Completion	Twelve (12) Months	
Original Completion Date	14 th August 2018	
Revised Time for Completion	Fourteen (14.63) Months (as per information included in the Defects Liability Certificate).	
Revised Completion Date	02 nd November 2018 as per information provided in the Defects Liability Certificate (Taking-Over certificate was not seen by the audit team).	
Actual Completion Date	14 th November 2018 (as per information in the Defects Liability Certificate)	
Defects Liability Period (DLP)	One (1) Year (Expected to end on 14 th November 2019)	














Actual End of Defects Liability Period	15 th February 2020 (as per information in the Defects Liability Certificate issued on 05 th June 2020)	
Final Contract Amount (as per Final Payment Certificate)	UGX: 42,187,329,051 Excl. 18% VAT; UGX 49,781,048,280 Incl. 18% VAT	




3.1.2 Scope of Works

Works on this USMID project comprised rehabilitation to Bitumen Standard of 13 roads totalling to 9.07Km; i.e. Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km), Laroo Road (1.96km), Alex Ojara Road (0.68km), Tank Road (0.34km), Brother Reuben Road (0.64km), Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km), Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.27km), Nyerere Avenue (0.88km), Odida Road (0.25km), Timothy Okwera Road (0.42Km), Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km), Golf-course Road

(0.45KM) and Peter Paul Opok Road (0.86km).

The original scope involved the following:

- Drainage Works;

 Earthworks;

- For some roads; Crushed Stone Subbase varying in thickness: 225mm, 300mm. For other roads; Natural Gravel Subbase varying in thickness: 100mm, 125mm, 150mm;
- Crushed Stone Base on all roads but varying in thickness: 150mm, 175mm, 200mm, 250mm, 350mm;
- For some roads; Double Surface Dressing. For other roads; 50mm Asphalt Concrete

Surfacing;

- Ancillary Road works including street lighting, tree planting among others.

The Revision in Scope following design review by the Supervision Consultant involved the following:

- The road length increased by 0.167Km to a total of 9.237Km following addition of 0.53Km on Laroo Road and slight decreases in road lengths on several roads following the design review changes;
- Subbase: 150mm thick Natural Gravel G30 for all roads;
- Base: 150mm thick Crushed Stone CRR for all roads;
- Surfacing: 50mm Asphalt Concrete Surfacing for all roads.

3.1.3 Status of the project at the time of audit

At the time of audit, the road construction works were complete and the DLP had ended (15 th February 2020). Following are pictorial illustrations of the infrastructure status for each of the roads as recorded at the start and end of each road by the Auditor at the time of the audit.

1. Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km): Complete











2)	Laroo Road (2.49km): Complete.		
3)	Alex Ojara Road (0.60km): Complete.		
4)	Tank Road (0.27km): Complete.		
5)	Brother Reuben Road (0.625km): Complete.		
6)	Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km): Complete.		
7)	Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.275km): Complete.		














8)	Nyerere Avenue (0.82km): Complete.		
9)	Odida Road (0.24km): Complete.		
10)	Timothy Okwera Road (0.25Km): Complete.		
11)	Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km): Complete.		
12)	Golf-course Road (0.45KM): Complete.		
13)	Peter Paul Opok Road (0.897km): Complete.		














3.1.4 Assessment of Economy The score on economy was 21.47 out of 30 as detailed below;

(a) Assessment of the percentage difference between the quantities in the engineer’s estimates and final implemented quantities

i) Percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and Final Implemented quantities

A review was made of quantities of the selected items in the Engineer’s Estimates and Final Implemented for the USMID project. The results of the assessment are presented in Table 3.1-2 below;

T able 3.1-2: Percentage difference between quantities in the engineer’s estimate and final i mplementation

Bill Item Description	Unit	Quantity in Engineer' s Estimate Qe	Final Implemente d Quantity Qf	Absolut e % Diff. between Qf and Qe (F)	Maximum allowable percentag e difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipalit y (Max. Score for all 5 items is 10)	Scores of this Project S=2*(Fm/F )	
Precast Concrete Class 30 Barrier Kerb	m	47,936.81	16,662.38	65.24%	25%	2.00	0.77	
Asphalt Concrete Surfacing	m 3	7,517.12	4,363.12	41.96%	25%	2.00	1.19	
Clearing & Grubbing	ha	13.32	6.70	49.70%	25%	2.00	1.01	
White Lines, Broken or Unbroken	m	14,253.04	24,696.20	73.27%	25%	2.00	0.68	
CRR for Road Base	m 3	15,454.28	14,600.53	5.52%	25%	2.00	2.00	
TOTAL SCORE:						10.00	5.65	




The Municipality scored 5.65 out of 10.

From the table above, the municipality’s percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and final implemented quantities for four of the five items assessed were higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference. The observed differences were indicative of inadequacies in estimation of quantities for the items.

Physical Cost per Unit Area from Engineer's Estimate (Ce)	Physical Cost per Unit Area from Contract (Cc)	Absolute % Diff. Between Ce and Cc (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 5*(Fm/F)	
225,211	430,419	91.12%	15.00%	5	0.82	














The Municipality scored 0.82 out of 5.

From the table above, the percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost was 91.12%, which was higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference.

ii) Percentage difference between the Contracted unit cost and the Final Implemented unit cost

A review was made of the Contracts and the Final Implementation records for the USMID project. The results of the assessment are presented in table 3.1-3 below;

T able 3.1-3: Percentage difference between contracted unit cost and final implemented unit

cost

Physical Cost per Unit Area from contract (Cc)	Physical Cost per Unit Area - from Final Implementation (Ci)	Absolute % Diff. between Cc & Ci (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 15*(Fm/F)	
430,419	397,660	7.61%	15.00%	15	15	




The Municipality scored 15.00 out of 15.

From the table above, the percentage difference between the contracted unit cost and the final implemented unit cost of 7.61% was within the allowable percentage difference.











3.1.5 Assessment of Efficiency The score on efficiency was 16.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication		Recommendations		
(a) Assessment of progress of works against timeAssessment of Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress) Review of the works contract showed that the works commenced on 14 th August 2017 and 100% completion was expected on 14 th August 2018. Following increase of the length of Laroo Road, the completion date was revised to 28 th October 2018. As per information stated in the Defects Liability Certificate, the latest revised completion date was 02 nd November 2018 and the actual completion date was 14 th November 2018. Therefore, there was a physical progress lag. However, the audit team could not determine the physical progress lag due to insufficient information.The Audit noted that, despite the delay, the Municipality did not charge liquidated damages against the Contractor in contravention of the Clause 49.1 of the Conditions of Contract which states that “----- the Contractor shall pay liquidated damages to the Employer at the rate per day stated in the SCC for each day that the completion date is later than the Intended Completion Date. ….). In this case, the rate per day was 0.05% of the Accepted Contract Amount, which translates to UGX 21,749,529 per day.(i)	Poor project management.	Delayed completion of works denies beneficiaries timely use of the infrastructure.		The Accounting Officer should put in place measures to ensure that works are always executed and completed as per the planned timeline and where contractors fail to deliver on time, liquated damages should be charged.		
Management Response There is need to differentiate between handover and completion. Whereas the Contractor achieved completion on time and indeed gave notice for final inspection and handover (see Attached), the Municipality leadership had other engagements and could only attend inspection on 14 th November. No contractor can ever allow to be penalized for the Employer’s own lack of time for timely inspection.remarks The municipality did not provide the evidence to show that works had been completed by 2 nd November.Auditor’s						
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal						




8











Finding								Cause		Implication				Recommendations					
controls for certification and payment of executed works (i) Presence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments. Audit review of the interim payment certificates 5, 6 and 7 (penultimate) showed that detailed measurement sheets were prepared and attached to the payment certificates.								N/A			OK				OK				
(ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment documents for IPCs and Fee Notes showed that the payments were consistent with certified amounts as detailed in the respective tables below for works and services contracts respectively.								N/A			OK				OK				
Payments above certified amounts (Contractor) Ser. No.5 6 7 8IPC No.IPC 4 IPC 5 IPC 6 IPC 7 TOTALAMOUNT CERTIFIED (UGX) 5,007,743,345 2,751,776,583 2,809,162,520 7,181,325,039 17,750,007,487AMOUNT PAID (UGX) 5,007,743,345 2,751,776,583 2,809,162,520 7,181,325,039 17,750,007,487PAYMENT ABOVE CERTIFIED 0 0 0 0RemarksOK OK OK OK																			
																			
																			
																			
																			
																			
																			
																			
Payments above certified amounts (Consultant) Fee Note No.4 5 TotalDATE SUBMITTED BY UB 12-Sep-18 7-Dec-18AMOUNT SUBMITTED (UGX) 152,185,518 144,820,200AMOUNT CERTIFIED (UGX) 132,012,000 144,820,200 276,832,200AMOUNT PAID INCL. 6% WHT (UGX) 132,012,000 144,820,200 276,832,200PAYMENT ABOVE CERTIFIED 0 0 0RemarksOK OK																			
																			
																			
																			
																			




9











Finding	Cause	Implication		Recommendations		
(iii) Physical verifications to check overpayments From 13 th to 15 th August 2020, the audit team in the presence of a representative assigned by the Municipality conducted field measurements on works that were executed and compared with the corresponding quantities certified in the IPC No.7 (Penultimate). No overpayment was obtained	N/A		Ok		Ok	
(iv) Timeliness in Payments Clause 43.1 of the GCC of the works contract stated that “the Employer shall pay the contractor the amounts certified by the project manager w i thin 30 days of the date of each certificate”. Clause GCC 26.1 of the contract signed between the Client and consultant states that “payments shall be made by the procuring and disposing entity within 30 days of receipt and certification of the fee note accompanied by supporting documents”.Audit noted that payments for IPCs No.4, 5, 6 and 7 were delayed by 112, 67, 36, and 11 days respectively. The last 50% of the retention had already delayed by 40 days by audit time.Payment for the Consultant’s Invoice No.4 was delayed by 12 days.Details of payments to the Contractor and the Consultant are shown in the table below;	Poor project management		Delayed payments negatively affect the Contractor’s and consultant’s cash flows which may negatively impact on delivery of their contractual obligations to the Municipality;Could lead to interest claims due to delayed payments		The Accounting Officer should ensure that payments are effected timely as per the terms in the signed contracts.	




10











Finding							Cause			Implication		Recommendations	
i meliness in payment (Contractor)													
Ser.	IPC		DATE	DATE PAYMENT		PAYMENT		Remarks					
No.	No.		CERTIFIED	PAID ABOVE		DURATION							
			BY PM CERTIFIED			(post							
						certification)							
						(Days)							
5 IPC 4 29-Jun-18 19-Oct-18 0 112 By the time of the previous audit , the IPC No.4 was already certifiedbut not yet paid; ultimately it delayed by 112 days													
6 IPC 5 13-Aug-18 19-Oct-18 0 67 Payment delayed by 67 days													
7 IPC 6 13-Sep-18 19-Oct-18 0 36 Payment delayed by 36 days													
8 IPC 7 8-Dec-18 19-Dec-18 0 11 Payment delayed by 11 days													
9 Final Certificate 4-Jun-20				76 Last 50% of retention money certified on 04th June 2020 was already									
				delayed by 40 days at the time of completing audit on 19th August 2020									
													
i meliness in payments (Consultant)													
Fee Note		DATE DATE			DATE PAYMENT				PAYMENT		Remarks		
No.		SUBMITTED CERTIFIED			PAID ABOVE				DURATION				
		BY UB BY AMC CERTIFIED							(post				
									submission)				
									(Days)				
4 12-Sep-18 25-Sep-18 24-Oct-18 0 42 Payment delayed by 12 days													
5 7-Dec-18 12-Dec-18 19-Dec-18 0 12 Paid timely													
Response true and this was because Gulu was being upgraded from tier II (dynamics) to Tier I (oracles) and it’s planning from Output Budgeting Tool (OBT) to Programme Budgeting System (PBS) that caused the delay in up-load of our budget hence delayed payments but now we have overcome that and payments being effected as required.remarks audit notes the cause of the delays in payments.ManagementAuditor’s													




T

T

Its’ are

The

11











Finding	Cause	Implication		Recommendations		
(c) OPTION B: Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements during Project Closure (i) Detailed certificate of completion and snag list The Municipality did not provide to the audit team a copy of the detailed Completion Certificate accompanied by a detailed Snag List.	Poor project management				The Accounting Officer should ensure that works are inspected at completion to checks for any defects and a detailed completion certificate accompanied by a snag list issued.	
Management Response It is true that by the time of audit, the snag list and detailed certificate were filed separately and could not be assessed by the audit team. They have now been availed for verification.Auditor’s remarks Not availed for verification.						
(ii) As-built drawings presence According to Clause 58.1 of the Special Conditions of Contract, the as-built drawings were to be supplied by the Contractor on a monthly basis to enable the Project Manager prepare the as-built drawings. Audit noted that there were as-built drawings on file.			No record of what exactly was executed which would be a major hindrance during maintenance.		The municipality should always include as-built drawings in the contract.	
Management Response The as-built drawings were submitted by the Consultant together with the completion report on 21 st March 2019. However, due to changes in office, their location at time of audit was difficult. They have now been availed for verification.Auditor’s remarks The as-built drawings were not availed for verification.						
(iii) Percentage of quality DLP progress/monitoring reports Clauses 35.1, 35.2 and 36.1 of the Conditions of Contract provide that during the 365 days DLP, the Project Manager shall periodically notify the Contractor of any developing defects, duly instructing the deadlines for	Poor project management		Defects that arise during DLP may not be captured and corrected if		The municipality should ensure that inspections are carried out during the DLP as some defects can only	




12











Finding	Cause	Implication		Recommendations		
rectification of the defects; and that the Contractor shall rectify the defects as instructed. The contract also provides that the DLP shall be extended as long as defects remain to be corrected.ccording to the Defects Liability Certificate seen, the DLP was from 14 th November 2018 to 14 th November 2019. No progress/ monitoring reports were prepared during the DLP save for the final inspection conducted on 04 th June 2020.A			inspections and reports are not done.		surface while the structure is in use and report on the progress of the structure during such period.	
Management Response It’s true there were no progress report during DLP because there was no progress of work.Auditor’s remarks The Municipality’s assertion that DLP progress reports were not prepared because there was no progress of work during the DLP is a clear misunderstanding of the obligations of the Parties during the DLP. During the DLP, performance of the snags should be monitored and reported. Further, the infrastructure should also be inspected periodically during the DLP to ascertain emergence of any defects and instructions for rectification issued accordingly.						
(iv) Presence of Defects Liability Certificate The works contract conditions in Clause 57 requires that the Project Manager shall issue to Contractor a DLP Certificate within 56 days after receiving the final account from the Contractor which is itself supposed to be submitted before the end of the DLP.The Defects Liability Certificate was issued on 05 th June 2020.	N/A		OK		OK	




13











3.1.6 Assessment of Effectiveness The score on effectiveness was 33.41 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementationMaterial test results on file There were material test results on file. Process control testing was also duly conducted for works under construction e.g. Field Density Testing for pavement layers and asphalt coring and testing.N/A OK OK(i)				
(ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications The audit team conducted no checks.N/A OK OK				
(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to SpecificationsAudit did not carry out any tests. N/A OK OK				
(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain any defects Works were inspected on 17 th and 18 th August 2020 in the presence of a representative of the Municipality. The following minor defects were observed:				
S i r Samuel Baker Road: Poorly placed drainage covers				




14











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Laroo Road: Grass growing, overgrown bushes in walkway and trash canh i dden in overgrown bushesLaroo Road: Silted inlet to covered drains under walkways				
Management Responses on observed defects The audit observation is correct and substantive cleaning works/ maintenance were conducted on Laroo road and is now as clean as the other roads.The municipality has not provided pictorial evidence of the interventions undertaken.Auditor’s remarks				
Hassan Mitchel Road; misused trash can and road sign installed in the walkway				




15











Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Management Responses on observed defects We concur with the audit recommendation and shall implement it.

Auditor’s remarks

To be followed up.

Lasto Oketch Road and extension along Church Hill Drive: Ponding on road surface

Management Response

We concur with the audit recommendation and shall implement it.

Auditor’s remarks

To be followed up.

16











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Golf-course Roadstatus at time of audit in August 2020				
Management Response We concur with the audit recommendation and shall implement it.remarks To be followed up.Auditor’s				
The municipality ensure that the defects are rectified so that the road can be fully functional as intended.(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure (i) Observed functionality and usage All the 13 roads were in normal use at the time of the audit with the exception of the following: - Laroo Road where inlets to the covered side drains were blocked by rubbish and silt, the rest of the roads had drainage systems functioning normally. - The sidewalks on Sir Samuel Baker road for a short section at Km 0 LHS where traders’ merchandise has covered the walkway width partially. - Trash cans on Laroo road were covered by overgrown bushes. - Misused trash can on Hassan Mitchel road.				




17











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
In general, therefore, the roads were in normal use and the different components functioning well.				
N/A OK OK(c) Assessment of the fulfilment/ adequacy of implemented environmental, Health, social & safety measuresPhysical evidence of satisfactory implementation of environmental protection measures In the respective approved BoQs of each of the 13 roads, allowance was made for grassing and tree planting. The Final Payment Certificate shows that trees were planted on all the roads and grassing was done on some of the roads. Physical inspection by the audit team revealed that the planted trees were growing very well and the grounds in the grassed areas were fully covered.(i)				
				
Grassed area beyond walkway on Goldcourse Road; Grassing & tree planting in roundabout at Sir Samuel Baker Road				
(ii) Physical evidence of satisfactory implementation of social/safety measuresThe audit team observed the following social/ safety measures implementedN/A OK OK				




18











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
for the 13 roads; - Pedestrian safety was improved at junctions and at intervals along the roads by providing uncontrolled pedestrian crossings in appropriate locations and the required pedestrian ramp to aid people with disabilities. - Rumble strips and speed humps were provided in very busy areas where vulnerable pedestrians cross the roads such as schools and health facilities; - Raised walkways were provided on either side of the road to separate pedestrian traffic from motorised traffic. The walkways are of adequate width and are even. Only one incident was observed on Golf course road where a protruding manhole was observed on the walkway. Also, road signs were installed in the middle of the walkways, thus, obstructing pedestrians to an extent. However, the sign plates are at adequate height clearance above the walkway finished surface. - Cycle lanes were also provided on either side of the carriageway.				
				
Humps on Hassan Mitchel Road, cycle lanes and raised walkways				




19











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(d) Assessment of the extent of O&M for completed facilitiesPercentage of key audit recommendations implementedThere was no evidence of implementation of previous audit recommendations.(i)			The municipality should endeavour to implement the audit recommendations.	
Management response There is no implementation of the recommendations as the previous audit responses for 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 financial years were submitted to parliament for their consideration but have not received any feedback to date.				
(ii) Evidence of planning and budgeting for O&M activitiesThe Municipality provided a copy of its plan and budget for O&M activities.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iii) Visual evidence of maintenance activities The audit team observed that routine manual maintenance activities such as sweeping, slashing, garbage collection, and removal of debris were being carried out by the Municipality except for Laroo Road.			The municipality should ensure that they carry out maintenance activities on all project roads.	




20











3.2 Project Title: Rehabilitation of Badrudin Road (0.290Km) and Gulu-Gulu Road (0.310Km)

3.2.1 Contract Details

T able 3.2-1: Contract details

Project Name	Rehabilitation of Badrudin Road (0.290Km) and Gulu- Gulu Road (0.310Km)	
Project Reference Number	GULU 754/WRKS/18-19/00006	
Executing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council (Now Gulu City)	
Design Consultant	N/A	
Project Manager	Ag. Municipal Council Engineer, Gulu	
Contractor	M/S Destiny Civil Engineering Limited of P.O. Box 914 Kampala	
Original Contract Amount	UGX: 1,094,579,093 VAT Inclusive	
Final Contract Amount	UGX: 1,094,579,093 VAT Inclusive	
Revised Contract Amount	N/A	
Date of submission of tender	04 th January 2019	
Works Contract Signing Date	05 th February 2019	
Commencement date	15 th February 2019	
Original Contract duration	Four and Half (4 1/2) Months	
Original expected completion date	30 th June 2019	
Revised Completion date	24 th October 2019 (extension of 116 days or 3.81 months due to abnormal rainfall)	
Actual completion Date	Works were not completed; had stalled at the time of the audit	
Defects Liability Period	365 days	
End Date of DLP	TBD	
Amount of Advance payment	UGX 218,915,819 (20% of the Contract Sum)	
Physical Progress reported	85% at end of June 2019	
Time Lapse	100% of original time for completion by end of June 2019; 34.97% of the revised time for completion	




3.2.2 Scope of Works

The scope of the works included;

- Bush clearing;

 Earthworks;

- Subbase layer (type not stated);
- Base layer (type not stated);
- Tarmacking with two seals;
- Drainage works comprising Culverts installation and Stone pitched trapezoidal side ditches











		
Status of Badrudin Road at the time of audit		
		
Status of Gulu-Gulu Road at the time of audit		




3.2.4 Assessment of Economy The score on economy was 25.71 out of 30 as detailed below;

(a) Assessment of the percentage difference between the quantities in the engineer’s estimates and final implemented quantities

i) Percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and Final Implemented quantities

A review was made of quantities of the selected items in the Engineer’s Estimates and Final Implemented for the URF project. The results of the assessment are presented in the table 3.2-2 below;

Bill Item Description	Unit	Quantity in Engineer's Estimate Qe	Final Implemented Quantity Qf	Absolute % Diff. between Qf and Qe (F)	Maximu m allowabl e percent age differen ce (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality (Max. Score for all 5 items is 10)	Scores of this Project S=2*(Fm/F)	
600mm culverts	m	105.00	109.20	4.00%	25%	2.00	2.00	
Concrete Class 25 for drains	m 3	343.90	63.60	81.51%	25%	2.00	0.61	
Prime Coat	ltr	6,048.00	5,995.10	0.87%	25%	2.00	2.00	
First Seal Coat (chippings and Bitumen)	m 2	6,048.00	4,995.90	17.40%	25%	2.00	2.00	














Bill Item Description	Unit	Quantity in Engineer's Estimate Qe	Final Implemented Quantity Qf	Absolute % Diff. between Qf and Qe (F)	Maximu m allowabl e percent age differen ce (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality (Max. Score for all 5 items is 10)	Scores of this Project S=2*(Fm/F)	
Gravel for sub- base	m 3	3,418.10	763.60	77.66%	25%	2.00	0.64	
TOTAL SCORE:						10.00	7.25	




The Municipality scored 7.25 out of 10.

From the table above, the municipality’s percentage differences between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and final implemented quantities for concrete class 25 for drains and gravel for sub-base were higher than the allowable percentage difference. The observed differences are indicative of inadequacies in estimation of quantities for the items.

(b)

Assessment of the variation in unit prices for works of similar nature i) Percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost

A review was made of the Engineer’s Estimates and the Contract for the URF project. The results of the assessment are presented in table 3.2-3 below;

T able 3.2-3: Percentage difference between engineer’s unit cost and contracted unit cost

Physical Cost per Unit Area from Engineer's Estimate (Ce)	Physical Cost per Unit Area from Contract (Cc)	Absolute % Diff. Between Ce and Cc (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 5*(Fm/F)	
141,308	110,693	21.67%	15.00%	5	3.46	




The Municipality scored 3.46 out of 5

From the table above, the percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost was 21.67%, which was higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference.

ii) Percentage difference between the Contracted unit cost and the Final Implemented unit cost

Physical Cost per Unit Area from contract (Cc)	Physical Cost per Unit Area - from Final Implementation (Ci)	Absolute % Diff. between Cc & Ci (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 15*(Fm/F)	
110,693	96,301	13.00%	15.00%	15	15.00	














3.2.5 Assessment of Efficiency The score on efficiency was 14.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Assessment of Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress) Review of the works contract showed that the works commenced on 15 th February 2019 and 100% completion was expected on 30 th June 2019. Due to heavy rains received in the area, the time for completion was revised to 24 th October 2019. The progress report dated 23 rd June 2019 indicated that by end of June 2019, the physical progress achieved was 85.5%. No further reports exist on the project management file. Assessment of the physical status of the works at audit time revealed that beyond June 2019, no further physical progress was achieved despite the time extension granted. It is implied that the Contractor abandoned the project and the Municipality seems to be taking no appropriate action.(a) Assessment of progress of works against timeAt audit time, the project had already delayed by 300 days beyond the latest revised completion date of 24 th October 2019. In accordance with the above reported physical progress, the physical progress lag was 14.5%.(i)	Poor contract management.	Delayed completion of works denies beneficiaries timely use of the infrastructure.	The Accounting Officer should put in place measures to ensure that works are always executed and completed as per the planned timeline.The Municipality should charge the contractor the maximum amount of liquidated damages (UGX 54,728,955) which was already due in accordance with Clause 49.1 of the Conditions of Contract and consider options of terminating the contract.	
Management Response We concur with the audit findings on the delayed project by about 300 days. The project manager wrote a letter to the Managing Director of Destiny Civil Engineering Company Limited dated 28 th June 2019 drawing his attention to the fact that the contract works were not completed within the contractual period, why the company was not at site and whether the contractor is still interested in finishing the contract.Auditor’s remarks No evidence of any communication with the contractor regarding the delayed progress of works was availed.				
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works (i) Presence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the	Poor project management.	Failure to know the actual quantity of work done upon which payment should have	The Municipality should always measure the works and the detailed measurement sheets	




24











Finding					Cause		Implication		Recommendations			
actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments.Audit review of the interim Payment Certificates No. 1 and 2 showed that detailed measurement sheets were not prepared for attaching to the payment certificates.					been effected.		are prepared and attached to payment certificates.			
Management Response It is true that at the time of preparation of the certificates of payments, the Engineer relied on the quantities in the Bill of Quantities to prepare the certificates of payment. This came about because of the capacity gaps in the Engineering department. Management is working hard to breach this capacity gaps by recruiting more staff in the Engineering department and planned to support refresher courses for staff in the Engineering department to boost their performance in the subsequent contracts. Attached is the submission letter to District Service Commission of Gulu for recruitment of the principal Engineer.remarks To be followed up.Auditor’s												
(ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment documents for IPCs showed that the payments were consistent with certified amounts as detailed in the table below;					N/A		OK		OK			
AMOUNT PAID (UGX) 218,915,819 405,763,866 170,000,000 794,679,685PAYMENT ABOVE CERTIFIED 0 0 0RemarksOK OK OKPayments above certified amounts (Contractor)Ser. No.1 2 3IPC No.Advance IPC 1 IPC 2DATE CERTIFIED BY PM 14-Mar-19 10-May-19 15-Aug-19AMOUNT CERTIFIED (UGX) 218,915,819 405,763,866 242,945,876 867,625,561												
												
												
												
												
												
Physical verifications to check overpayments On 16 th August 2020, in the presence of a representative assigned by the Municipality the audit team conducted field measurements on the project works and compared with the corresponding quantities certified in the IPCs No.1 and No.2.The audit noted that an overpayment of UGX 176,963,524 and UGX(iii)							Loss of funds		The Municipality should recover the overpayment of UGX 314,489,175.			




25











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

137,525,650 on Badrudin and Gulu – Gulu Roads respectively. Overall, an overpayment of UGX 314,489,175, which is 37.31% of the certified amount of UGX 842,882,201 was noted.

O verpayment on Badrudin Road

Item

Brief Description

No.

DRAINS 21.01 Excavation for open drains (a) Excavating soft material situated within the following depth ranges below the surface level: (Not side ditches where volumes are included under Earthwork excavations) and dispose of site within 5Km (i) 0.0 m up to 0.5 m

PREFABRICATED CULVERTS

22.01 Excavation (a) Excavating soft material situated within the following depth ranges below the surface level: (i) Up to 1.5 m 22.02 Backfilling (b) Using imported selected material 22.03 Concrete pipe culverts (a) Reinforced concrete pipe culverts on Class A bedding (i) 900 mm diameter

CONCRETE KERBING, CONCRETE CHANNELING,

OPEN CONCRETE CHUTES AND CONCRETE

LININGS FOR OPEN DRAINS

23.03 Concrete gutter

Unit Contract Audit Certified Difference Amount of

Provisions Quantity Quantity (Certified - overpayment Quantity Rate Audit) (Badrudin)

cu.m. 872.3 9,000 324.00 872.32 548.32 4,934,880

cu.m. 26.0 33,000 0.00 26.00 26.00 858,000 cu.m. 872.3 7,000 0.00 2,676.93 2,676.93 18,738,524

m 25.0 200,000 0.00 41.00 41.00 8,200,000

(a) Concrete grade ST2 gutter as detailed on Dwg. m 60.0 10,000 0.00 60.00 60.00 600,000 15m at start and ends only

26











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

23.07 Trimming of excavations for concrete-lined open drains: (a) Soft material as defined in Clause 3603 of the cu.m. 274.6 9,000 Standard Specifications 23.18 Residential/vehicle access points

0.00 274.56 274.56 2,471,040

(a) Class 30 precast concrete slab reinforced with no. 140.0 100,000 0.00 140.00 140.00 14,000,000 Y12 ribbed bars at access points (Slab 900mm x 1000mm x 100mm thick), including formwork and sand blinding as shown in Dwg No. KBSEC003 (c) Y12mm steel bars for reinforcement of ton 1.82 500,000 0.00 1.82 1.82 910,000 monolithic kerbs, spaced at 200 C/C

PITCHING, STONEWORK AND PROTECTION

AGAINST EROSION

25.01 Stone pitching (b) Grouted stone pitching, 200 mm thick

EARTHWORKS 36.02 Fill and improved subgrade layers: 36.03 Roadbed preparation and compaction of material:

sq.m 156.0 20,000 0.00 156.00 156.00 3,120,000

(b) Compaction to 95% MDD, BS-heavy density cu.m. 1,917.5 41,800 407.28 1,622.50 1,215.22 50,796,353 CRUSHED AGGREGATE FOR ROAD BASE 39.01 Crushed aggregate for road base (a) 150mm lime stabilise road base at rate 5% CRR cu.m. 1,821.6 15,000 340.45 1,821.63 1,481.17 22,217,606 for subbase

PRIME AND CURING MEMBRANES

41.01 Prime coat (a) MC-30 cutback bitumen 41.03 Aggregate for blinding DOUBLE SURFACE DRESSINGS 42.01 Double surface dressing

ltr 3,186.0 5,500 2,675.01 3,160.00 484.99 2,667,445 cu.m. 41.6 35,000 7.80 40.90 33.10 1,158,426

27











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

(a) First seal coat: Provide, heat and spray 80/100 sq.m 3,186.0 25,000 2,229.18 3,160.00 930.83 23,270,625 penetration grade bitumen at a rate of 1.2l/m2 and provide, spread and roll 14/20mm size chippings at a rate of 22kg/m2 in single surface dressing. (b) Second seal coat: Provide, heat and spray 80/100 penetration grade bitumen at a spray rate of 1.0l/m2 and 10/14mm size chippings at a rate of 18kg/m2 in double surface dressing.

TOTAL

O verpayment

on Gulu - Gulu Road

Item

Brief Description

No.

DRAINS 21.01 Excavation for open drains (a) Excavating soft material situated within the following depth ranges below the surface level: (Not side ditches where volumes are included under Earthwork excavations) and dispose off site within 5Km (i) 0.0 m up to 0.5 m

PREFABRICATED CULVERTS

22.01 Excavation (a) Excavating soft material situated within the following depth ranges below the surface level: (i) Up to 1.5 m 22.02 Backfilling (b) Using imported selected material 22.03 Concrete pipe culverts (a) Reinforced concrete pipe culverts on Class A bedding

sq.m 3,186.0 25,000 2,229.18 3,150.00 920.83 23,020,625 176,963,524

Unit Contract Audit Certified Difference Amount of

Provisions Quantity Quantity (Certified - overpayment Quantity Rate Audit) (Gulu- Gulu)

cu.m. 782.1 9,000 419.41 609.12 189.71 1,707,395 cu.m. 76.8 33,000 68.13 76.80 8.67 286,067 cu.m. 1,270.9 7,000 55.06 4,568.40 4,513.34 31,593,407

28











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

(i) 900 mm diameter

CONCRETE KERBING, CONCRETE CHANNELING,

OPEN CONCRETE CHUTES AND CONCRETE

LININGS FOR OPEN DRAINS

23.03 Concrete gutter

m 80.0 200,000 31.24 54.00 22.76 4,552,000

(a) Concrete grade ST2 gutter as detailed on Dwg. m 60.0 10,000 0.00 0.00 0 15m at start and ends only 23.07 Trimming of excavations for concrete-lined open drains: (a) Soft material as defined in Clause 3603 of the cu.m. 274.6 9,000 0.00 0.00 0 Standard Specifications 23.18 Residential/vehicle access points (a) Class 30 precast concrete slab reinforced with no. 140.0 100,000 0.00 0.00 0 Y12 ribbed bars at access points (Slab 900mm x 1000mm x 100mm thick), including formwork and sand blinding as shown in Dwg No. KBSEC003 (c) Y12mm steel bars for reinforcement of monolithic ton 0.80 500,000 0.00 0.80 0.80 400,000 kerbs, spaced at 200 C/C

PITCHING, STONEWORK AND PROTECTION

AGAINST EROSION

25.01 Stone pitching (b) Grouted stone pitching, 200 mm thick

EARTHWORKS 36.02 Fill and improved subgrade layers: 36.03 Roadbed preparation and compaction of material:

sq.m 750.0 20,000 1,165.96 720.00 -445.96 0

(b) Compaction to 95% MDD, BS-heavy density cu.m. 1,917.5 41,800 512.21 2,494.80 1,982.59 82,872,220 CRUSHED AGGREGATE FOR ROAD BASE 39.01 Crushed aggregate for road base (a) 150mm lime stabilise road base at rate 5% CRR cu.m. 1,605.5 15,000 423.11

- 0 for subbase

PRIME AND CURING MEMBRANES

41.01 Prime coat (a) MC-30 cutback bitumen 41.03 Aggregate for blinding

ltr 2,862.0 5,500 3,320.09 5,495.90 2,175.82 11,966,988 cu.m. 33.2 35,000 9.68 33.00 23.32 816,074

29











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

DOUBLE SURFACE DRESSINGS 42.01 Double surface dressing (a) First seal coat: Provide, heat and spray 80/100 sq.m 2,862.0 25,000 2,766.74 2,900.00 133.26 3,331,500 penetration grade bitumen at a rate of 1.2l/m2 and provide, spread and roll 14/20mm size chippings at a rate of 22kg/m2 in single surface dressing. (b) Second seal coat: Provide, heat and spray 80/100 sq.m 2,862.0 25,000 2,766.74 2,701.00 -65.74 0 penetration grade bitumen at a spray rate of 1.0l/m2 and 10/14mm size chippings at a rate of 18kg/m2 in double surface dressing.

TOTAL 137,525,650

Management Response

We have re-engaged the contractor and are now at site to complete the outstanding drainage and ancillary. A joint team from both the contractor and the management shall then conduct fresh measurement of the works to ascertain the real measurement of payment against work done. The certification done in the past IPC I and IPC II were interim payments. Any over payments if discovered, shall be adjusted in the last certificate of payment which shall be prepared after the joint measurements and if there is need to recover money from contractor, it will be done at this stage.

Auditor’s remarks

To be followed up.

(iv) Timeliness in Payments

Delayed payments Clause 43.1 of the GCC of the contract signed between the client and negatively affect the Contractor stated that “the Employer shall pay the contractor the amounts certified by the project manager within 30 days of the date of each certificate”.

Audit noted that the Advance Payment and IPC No.1 were paid timely whereas 70% of the IPC No.2 was delayed by 27 days and the remaining 30% had not yet been paid by audit time as shown in the table below;

Contractor’s cash flows which may negatively The Municipality should impact on delivery of ensure that payments their contractual are always made on obligations to the time. Municipality.

Could lead to interest claims due to delayed payments.

30











Finding						Cause			Implication	Recommendations		
Payment delay daysRemarks27OK OK 70% was delayed by 27 days and the remaining 30% had already delayed by 340 days b audit timePayment duration (post certification) (Days) 5 14 57T i meliness in payments (Contractor)Ser. No.IPC No.Date certified by PMDate paid1 2 3Advance IPC 1 IPC 214-Mar-19 10-May-19 15-Aug-1919-Mar-19 24-May-19 11-Oct-19												
												
												
												
												
Response We concur with the audit findings. The delayed payment for IPC II by about 27 days were due to the fluctuating IFMS network which was also verbally explained to the contractor. We shall also ensure that we stick to the contractual terms in the subsequent projects.Auditor’s remarks No documentary evidence supporting the delay was availed.Management												
(v) Other issues pertaining to management of costs on the projects Having noted the degree of overpayment on already certified works as presented in Item (b)(iii) above, the auditor carried out an assessment of the entire contract BoQ with a view to assess the Expected Final Contract Sum. The tables further below present the auditor’s computation of the expected final contract amount.Comments on exaggerated quantities in the Contract:  Item 21.01(a)(i): Excavation for open drains: While deriving the quantity, the engineer exaggerated the width of the drain to 9.4m, but used a smaller depth of 0.32m; overall, the quantity was exaggerated by 169.2% on Badrudin road and 46.5% on Gulu – Gulu Road;  Item 22.02(b): Backfilling to culverts: While deriving the quantity, the engineer exaggerated the width of the culvert trench to 9.4m, but used a smaller depth of 0.32m; no pipe void was deducted; overall, the quantity was exaggerated by 931.1% onSpecific									Contractor was overpaid beyond the expected final contract sum, yet drainage works on Badrudin Road is not yet executed;	The Accounting Officer should not sanction any further payments to the Contractor;The Contractor should execute and finish the outstanding works without any further payments from the Municipality;The Municipality should recover UGX 338,286,211 in total, unrecovered advance of UGX 58,915,819 and overpaid works amounting to UGX		




31











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Badrudin road and 1,077.8% on Gulu – Gulu Road;  Concrete Kerbing, Concrete channelling, Open concrete chutes and concrete linings for open drains: Items provided in this section of the BoQ are not applicable on the project, therefore the quantities provided in the contract under items 23.03(a), 23.07(a), 23.08(a)(i), 23.08(a)(ii)23.18(a), 23.18(c) are all ghost quantities;  Item 25.01(b): Stone pitching: It was not established how the engineer derived the quantities, but the auditor used the entire length the average dimensions of the already executed works on Gulu-Gulu Rd to calculate the final quantities; overall, the quantity was underestimated by 83.3% on Badrudin road and 50.2% on Gulu – Gulu Road;  Item 36.03(b): Roadbed preparation and compaction: While deriving the quantity, the engineer exaggerated the thickness of the roadbed to 0.65m instead of 0.15m provided in the specifications. This notwithstanding, it is also impractical to scarify and compact a roadbed layer of 650mm! Overall, the quantity was exaggerated by 370.8% on Badrudin road and 274.4% on Gulu – Gulu Road;  Item 39.01(a): Road Base: While deriving the quantity, the engineer exaggerated the thickness of the base layer to 0.65m instead of say 0.2m; no designs were available. Overall, the quantity was exaggerated by 435.0% on Badrudin road and 279.5% on Gulu – Gulu Road;  Prime Coat and Surface Dressing: While deriving the quantities for items under this section of the BoQ, the engineer used a width of 9.0m; no designs were available but physical measurements revealed that the DBST width on Badrudin Road is 8.5m average and 8.0m average on Gulu-Gulu Road. Overall, the quantities of items under this section of the BoQ were exaggerated as follows: - Item 41.01(a) Prime Coat: by 19.1% on Badrudin road and - 13.8% (underestimation) on Gulu – Gulu Road;			279,370,392.	




32











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
- Items 42.01(a) and (b) First Seal and Second Seal: by 42.9% on Badrudin Road and by 3.4% on Gulu-Gulu Road;  Item 55.03(b)(i) Yellow Lines: While deriving the quantity, the engineer exaggerated the length by 3 times; maximum should be same as length of the road since yellow line will be marked at centre only. Overall, the quantity was exaggerated by 228.9% on Badrudin road and 121.7% on Gulu – Gulu Road; As can be seen from the assessment tables below, the exaggerated quantities in the engineer’s estimate, which were carried into the procured contract, led to an exaggerated Contract Sum of UGX 1,094,579,093 VAT Inclusive (or UGX 927,609,590 VAT Exclusive) for double surface dressing of an ordinary single carriageway road of 8 to 8.5m width and 0.63Km, which translates to UGX 1.737Bn per Km. By correcting the quantities and applying the approved contract rates, the Expected Contract Amount becomes UGX 624,620,433 VAT Inclusive (or UGX 529,339,350 VAT Exclusive) as shown in the table immediately below. This means that, if the Municipality Continues to certify payments without properly conducting detailed measurement of actual works executed, it will cause a financial loss to Government of UGX 354,098,355 VAT Exclusive. The amount already certified by the Municipality inclusive of certified works and unrecovered advance portion is UGX 867,625,561 VAT Exclusive, which is higher than the expected final contract sum of UGX 529,339,350 by UGX 338,286,211.				




33











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations Summary of comparison between the Contracted Amount and the Auditor’s assessment of the Final Contract Amount

Contracted Item Description Amount UShs

Final Amount

(per the Difference Auditor) (Audit amount - Contract Amount) UShs Bill 1 Preliminaries and administrative costs

1 BADRUDIN AVENUE

2 Gulu Gulu Road

10,000,000 10,000,000 0 450,888,935 226,439,440 -224,449,495

413,190,720 288,999,910 -124,190,810

Subtotal 874,079,655 525,439,350 -348,640,305

16 Tolerances, Testing and Quality Control 17 Schedule of day work Rates - Labour (Provisional) 18 Schedule of Day work Rates - Materials (Provisional) 19 Schedule of Day work Rates - Equipment (Provisional)

3,900,000 3,900,000 0 1,274,000 - -1,274,000 1,795,300 - -1,795,300 2,388,750 - -2,388,750

Sub-total 9,358,050 3,900,000 -5,458,050

Subtotal 883,437,705 529,339,350 -354,098,355

5% Contingencies 44,171,885.25 - -44,171,885 Subtotal 927,609,590.25 529,339,350.00 -398,270,240 Add 18% VAT 166,969,726.25 95,281,083.00 -71,688,643 Total, Construction UShs 1,094,579,316.5 624,620,433.0 -469,958,883

C omparison between the Contracted and the Auditor’s assessment of the Final Contract Amount on Badrudin Road BoQ

Bill No. 2 - DRAINAGE

Contract Provisions Assessment of Final Difference: Qty

Amount

Audit - Contract Exaggeration

by the Auditor % Item Description Unit Qnty Unit Amount Final Final Amount Rate Qty UShs UShs UShs DRAINS 21.01 Excavation for open drains (a) Excavating soft material - situated within the following depth ranges below the

34











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

surface level: (Not side ditches where volumes are included under Earthwork excavations) and dispose off site within 5Km (i) 0.0 m up to 0.5 m 21.03 Excavation for service ducts (a) Excavating soft material situated within the following depth ranges below the surface level:

cu.m. 872.3 9,000 7,850,880 324.0 2,916,000 (4,934,880) 169.2%

- -
- -

(i) 0.0 m up to 1.5 m cu.m. 0.0 21.20 Backfilling for service ducts using cu.m. 0.0 approved material, compacted to 95% MDD

- 0.0 - -
- 0.0 - -

PREFABRICATED CULVERTS - - 22.01 Excavation - - (a) Excavating soft material

- - situated within the following depth ranges below the surface level: (i) Up to 1.5 m cu.m. 26.0 33,000 858,000 104.7 3,455,100 2,597,100 -75.2% 22.02 Backfilling - - (b) Using imported selected cu.m. 872.3 7,000 6,106,240 84.6 592,200 (5,514,040) 931.1% material 22.03 Concrete pipe culverts
- - (a) Reinforced concrete pipe
- - culverts on Class A bedding (i) 900 mm diameter m 25.0 200,000 5,000,000 48.0 9,600,000 4,600,000 -47.9% 22.04 OR Metal Culverts (a) MP 68 Pipe, Wall thickness of 0.0 2mm (i) 600 mm diameter m 0.0

- -
- 0.0 - -

- 0.0 - - (c) Anchor bolts no. 0.0 - 0.0 - - 22.29 OR HDPE Pipe Culverts
- - (a) Corrugated pipe, Stiffness SN
- -

35











Finding						Cause			Implication		Recommendations		
8													
(i) 600 mm diameter m 0.0 - 0.0 - -													
22.07 Cast in-situ concrete and formwork - -													
(c) Concrete Class 25 in inlet and cu.m. 15.6 360,000 5,616,000 15.6 5,616,000 - outlet structures, excluding formwork, but including Class U2 surface finish													
(d) Formwork for concrete under - -Sub item 22.07(c)													
(i) F1 sq.m. 32.0 18,000 576,000 32.0 576,000 -													
22.10 Steel reinforcement - -													
(a) Mild steel bars ton 2.0 500,000 1,000,000 2.0 1,000,000 -													
22.17 Manholes, catch pits, precast inlet - -and outlet structures complete:													
(a) Drainage Manholes (including no. 4.0 150,000 600,000 0.0 - (600,000) #DIV/0!round duty covers)													
22.23 Service ducts, Normal duty PVC/PE - - pipes, including sand bedding as shown in Dwg													
(a) 160mm diameter (electric m 0.0 - 0.0 - -supply)													
(b) 160mm diameter (telecom) m 0.0 - 0.0 - -													
22.24 Duct Markers - -													
(b) Duct Marker Tape m 0.0 - 0.0 - -													
22.30 Circular manholes for service ducts, no. 0.0 - 0.0 - - complete with base, shaft, pipe connections, and sealed cover as shown in Dwg													
22.31 OR Square manholes for service no. 0.0 - 0.0 - - ducts, complete with base, shaft, pipe connections, and sealed cover as shown in Dwg													
	CONCRETE KERBING,							-		-			
	CONCRETE CHANNELING,												
	OPEN CONCRETE CHUTES AND												
	CONCRETE LININGS FOR OPEN												




36











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

DRAINS 23.01 Concrete kerbing (a) Precast concrete Class 30 m 0.0 barrier kerb, including concrete bedding as shown in Dwg No. KBSEC002 23.03 Concrete gutter

- -
- 0.0 - -

- - (a) Concrete grade ST2 gutter as m 60.0 10,000 600,000 0.0 detailed on Dwg. 15m at start and ends only 23.07 Trimming of excavations for concrete-lined open drains: (a) Soft material as defined in cu.m. 274.6 9,000 2,471,040 0.0 Clause 3603 of the Standard Specifications 23.08 Concrete for open drains including formwork (a) (i) Class 30 precast concrete cu.m. 170.5 450,000 76,723,200 0.0 for open drains reinforced with BRC mesh A-142 (including sealed joints and formwork) (ii) Class A bedding for open cu.m. 23.7 75,000 1,776,000 0.0 drains (100mm thick) compacted gravel only

- (600,000) #DIV/0!

- -
- (2,471,040) #DIV/0!

- -
- (76,723,200) #DIV/0!

- (1,776,000) #DIV/0!

(b) Class U2 surface finish to cast sq.m. 0.0 in-situ concrete lining 23.17 Slab Type 1 for drainage channel (a) Class 30 precast concrete no. 0.0 slab over drainage channel reinforced with BRC mesh A- 142, including formwork and sand blinding as shown in Dwg No. KBSEC003 23.18 Residential/vehicle access points

- 0.0 - -

- -
- 0.0 - -

- - (a) Class 30 precast concrete no. 140.0 100,000 14,000,000 0.0

37

- (14,000,000) #DIV/0!











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

slab reinforced with Y12 ribbed bars at access points (Slab 900mm x 1000mm x 100mm thick), including formwork and sand blinding as shown in Dwg No. KBSEC003 (b) Class 30 precast concrete no. 0.0 monolithic kerbs, as shown on Dwg No. DRSEC002

- 0.0 - -

(c) Y12mm steel bars for ton 1.82 500,000 910,000 0.00 reinforcement of monolithic kerbs, spaced at 200 C/C PITCHING, STONEWORK AND

PROTECTION AGAINST

EROSION 25.01 Stone pitching

- (910,000) #DIV/0!
- -

- - (b) Grouted stone pitching, 200 sq.m 156.0 20,000 3,120,000 934.8 18,696,000 15,576,000 -83.3% mm thick 25.04 Block Paving (Slab Type 2) (d) Class 30 precast concrete slabs sq.m 0.0 reinforced with BRC mesh Y10 for sidewalk pavement, meeting Lagony road only blinding as shown in Dwg No. 2

- -
- 0.0 - -

Total, Bill 2 Carried to Summary: 127,207,360

Bill No. 3 - Earthworks and Pavement Layers

42,451,300 (84,756,060)

Assessment of Final Difference: Amount Audit - Contract by the Auditor Item Description Unit Qnty Unit Amount Final Final Amount Rate Qty

CLEARING, GRUBBING AND REMOVAL OF TOPSOIL

UShs UShs UShs

38











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

31.01 Clearing, grubbing and removal of - topsoil (a) Clearing and grubbing ha 0.1 1,000,000 100,000 0.1 100,000 - (b2) Removal of topsoil to spoil cu.m. 256.5 18,000 4,617,000 256.5 4,617,000 - 32.01 REMOVAL OF EXISTING

- - STRUCTURES (a) Removal of existing water item 1.0 3,000,000 3,000,000 1.0 3,000,000 - pipe and restoration there off, or culverts of any size, if any EARTHWORKS - - 36.01 Excavations: - - (a) Common excavation to spoil cu.m. 249.8 12,000 2,997,000 249.8 2,997,000 - (c) (i) Rock excavation to spoil cu.m. 20.0 50,000 1,000,000 20.0 1,000,000 - (estimated) 36.02 Fill and improved subgrade layers:
- - (a) Improved subgrade layer as cu.m. 175.5 23,500 4,124,250 175.5 4,124,250 - specified in the Drawings to required minimum G15 quality material (c) (i) Fill as specified in the cu.m. 1,821.6 6,000 10,929,750 1,821.6 10,929,750 - Drawings to require minimum G3 quality material 36.03 Roadbed preparation and
- - compaction of material: (b) Compaction to 95% MDD, cu.m. 1,917.5 41,800 80,151,500 407.3 17,025,140 (63,126,360) 370.8% BS-heavy density CRUSHED AGGREGATE FOR
- -

ROAD BASE

39.01 Crushed aggregate for road base

- - (a) 150mm lime stabilise road cu.m. 1,821.6 15,000 27,324,375 340.5 5,107,500 (22,216,875) 435.0% base at rate 5% CRR for subbase (b) Crushed aggregate Class CRR cu.m. 0.0 for base

- 0.0 - -

Total, Bill 3 Carried to Summary: 134,243,875

39

48,900,640 (85,343,235)











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

Bill No. 4 - Bituminous Pavements

Assessment of Final Difference:

Amount Audit - Contract by the Auditor Item Description Unit Qnty Unit Amount Final Final Amount Rate Qty

PRIME AND CURING MEMBRANES

41.01 Prime coat (a) MC-30 cutback bitumen 41.03 Aggregate for blinding DOUBLE SURFACE DRESSINGS 42.01 Double surface dressing

UShs UShs UShs

- ltr 3,186.0 5,500 17,523,000 2,675.0 14,712,500 (2,810,500) 19.1% cu.m. 41.6 35,000 1,456,700 7.80 273,000 (1,183,700) 433.6%

- -
- - (a) First seal coat: Provide, heat and sq.m 3,186.0 25,000 79,650,000 2,229.2 55,730,000 (23,920,000) 42.9% spray 80/100 penetration grade bitumen at a rate of 1.2l/m2 and provide, spread and roll 14/20mm size chippings at a rate of 22kg/m2 in single surface dressing. (b) Second seal coat: Provide, heat sq.m 3,186.0 25,000 79,650,000 2,229.2 55,730,000 (23,920,000) 42.9% and spray 80/100 penetration grade bitumen at a spray rate of 1.0l/m2 and 10/14mm size chippings at a rate of 18kg/m2 in double surface dressing.

Total, Bill 4 Carried to Summary: 178,279,700

Bill No. 5 - Ancillary Roadworks

-

126,445,500 (51,834,200)

Assessment of Final Difference:

Amount Audit - Contract by the Auditor Item Description Unit Qnty Unit Amount Final Final Amount Rate Qty

40











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

UShs UShs UShs ROAD SIGNS - 54.01 Road Signs

- - (b) Regulatory signs no. 1.0 800,000 800,000 1.0 - 800,000 (c ) Information signs no. 2.0 500,000 1,000,000 2.0 1,000,000 - ROAD MARKINGS - - 55.01 Road-Marking using road-marking
- - paint (f) Kerb Markings (black and white) m 0.0 55.03 Road marking using thermo-plastic road marking material (a) White lines, broken or unbroken

- 0.0 - -
- -

- - (i) 100mm wide (b) Yellow lines, broken or unbroken

m 590.0 9,800 5,782,000 540.0 5,292,000 (490,000) 9.3%

- - (i) 100mm wide m 888.0 2,900 2,575,200 270.0 (1,792,200) 228.9% 783,000 (f) Traffic island markings, white sq.m. 0.0 and yellow colour 55.05 Road studs (embedded glass) as no. 0.0 shown in the Dwg

- 0.0 - -
- 0.0 - -

55.06 Setting out & premarking the lines m 1,144.0 700 800,800 810.0 (excl. islands, lettering and symbols) 56.09 Tree planting species as directed, 1m no. 20.0 10,000 200,000 20.0 high

ROAD LIGHTING

58.02 Road Lighting Columns, Brackets and Wall Mountings

41

(233,800) 41.2% 567,000 - 200,000











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

(a) 9m steel road lighting column no. 0.0 complete with single side entry bracket, galvanised finish, and fitted with spikes 4m above the ground. The unit also includes the following: one LED Luminaire (40W/4500lm), two PV Panels (90W/17V) complete with connectors, one GEL Battery System of capacity 250AH (installed underground) and one Solar Charge Controller. All components shall be approved by Supervising Engineer. (d) Construct concrete blocks cu.m 0.00 300mm x 300mm x 800m mm above finished pavement/sidewalk to protect lighting columns from motorists [note: not to be used where column is protected by guardrail, kerbing and flowerbeds, or fencing] Only level and compact 1.2m widht outside the drain in gravel Only level and compact 1.2m widht outside the drain in gravel

TRASH CANS

0.0 - -

0.00 - -

59.01 Trash cans no. 0.0 0.0 - -

Total, Bill 5 Carried to Summary: 11,158,000

8,642,000 (2,516,000)

TOTALS

SUMMARY OF BADRUDIN AVENUE

450,888,935 0 226,439,440 -224,449,495

Assessment of Final Amount

by the Auditor

42











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

Bill Description

Amount Final Amount Diff. Audit - Contract No. UShs Ushs 2 Drainage 127,207,360 42451300 -84,756,060

3 Earthworks and Pavement Layers

4 Double surface dressing

134,243,875 48,900,640 -85,343,235 178,279,700 126,445,500 -51,834,200 5 Ancillary Roadworks 11,158,000 8,642,000 -2,516,000

Total, Construction: 450,888,935 226,439,440 -224,449,495

Management Response

Fresh measurement to verify the work done shall be conducted after the final finishing of the project by a joint team from both the contractor and the management to ascertain the at measurement payment and if there is any recovery to be made, shall be effected.

Auditor’s remarks

To be followed-up (c) OPTION A: Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements (i) Preparation of progress reports Three project technical reports of insufficient quality for the months of April, May and June 2019 were found on file. The reports only presented information on project title, brief scope description, findings of inspection and recommendations. They lacked key project progress monitoring and Poor project management project management information such as summary of contract data, time progress, achieved physical progress in the month, financial performance, quality control, resources utilisation on the project and planning for the forthcoming month.

Management Response

The Accounting officer Lack of information/ should put measures to data which limits ensure that quality stakeholders from progress reports making informed addressing all key decisions. project aspects are always prepared for all projects.

We concur with the audit findings. This was due to the capacity gaps in the Engineering department and shall improve on that by supporting them through a refresher course for a better reporting in the subsequent projects.

Auditor’s remarks

To be followed up.

43











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(ii) Presence of site meeting minutes From the audit review of the contract management file, two sets of signed site meeting minutes for May and June 2019 were on file. However, they lacked the attendance lists and a section on review of previous minutes and review of status of actions agreed during previous meeting.			The Municipality should improve the minutes to cover the identified gaps.	
Management Response Meetings and joint monitoring were conducted except that the records were not properly documented and shall be improve upon in the subsequent projects.remarks To be followed up.Auditor’s				
(iii) Approved supervising personnel on site The Municipal Engineer was appointed the Contract Supervisor to supervise the works and manage the project and administer the contract as per details of the appointment letter.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of the audit, the works had not yet been completed and the contractor had mobilised required equipment.	N/A	OK	OK	




44











3.2.6 Assessment of Effectiveness The score on effectiveness was 13.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementation

(i) Material test results on file

Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results and approved Quality Control and Quality Assurance document on file.

Management Response

The Municipality should It poses a risk of use of ensure that materials to Poor project management materials that do not be used in the permanent conform to the works are tested to avoid specifications. using materials that do not meet specification.

It is true that the material testing was not done and was not included in the bill of quantities. This is due to the capacity gaps noted in the Engineering department and we shall improve on those through refresher courses and through recruitment of more staff in the department for improvement in the subsequent projects.

Auditor’s Remarks

To be followed up.

(ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications

Some of the work items were checked by the audit team to ascertain conformance to design drawings and specifications. All the four checks conducted were ok representing 100% conformance.

Projects

Structure or Layer Tested

N/A OK OK

Auditors Specification Comment Recommendation Result (mm) (mm) Rehabilitation of Gulu- Thickness 0+050 LHS 167 120 OK Gulu Road (0.36km) Thickness 0+180 RHS 235 120 OK and Badrudin Road Thickness 0+130 LHS 152 120 OK (0.27km) Thickness 0+230 RHS 205 120 OK

(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications

45











Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

3 out of the 4 tests conducted passed representing 75% conformance. Auditors In-situ Tests Equipment /Tools Projects Structure or Layer Tested Result CBR

Specification Comment CBR Rehabilitation of Gulu- CBR 0+050 LHS 38 30 Passed DCP layer Dynamic Cone Gulu Road (0.36km) CBR 0+180 RHS 24 30 Failed thickness Penetrometer and Badrudin Road CBR 0+130 LHS 43 30 Passed (0.27km) CBR 0+230 RHS 43 30 Passed (iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defects The audit team inspected works on 18 th August 2020 in the presence of a representative assigned by the Municipality. The works were complete up to second seal on both roads but drainage was partially executed and the site had been abandoned by the Contractor. The following defects were observed:

Delayed completion of works deprives the

The Municipality should Employer and beneficiaries engage the Contractor to Abandoning work prior to of the intended benefit; re-mobilise and complete completion the outstanding works Deterioration of partially and rectify the defects completed works.

Irregular surface and poor jointing with existing paved road from km 0+000 to 0+010 on Badrudin Road

46











Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Excavated side ditches left unattended to on full length of Badrudin Road

Overgrown bushes in side ditches on entire length of Badrudin Road

47

Shoulder edge breaks at accesses on entire length of Badrudin Road











Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Observations on Gulu - Gulu Road

- 0+000 to 0+264 LHS and RHS: - In this Section where side ditches were stone pitched, access culverts were not provided at property accesses and the owners have, as result, backfilled the ditches to regain their accesses

Overgrown bushes in stone pitched side ditches along Gulu – Gulu Road from km 0+000 to 0+264 LHS, 0+080 to 0+264 RHS

48











Finding	Cause		Implication	Recommendation	
Shoulder edge breaks along Gulu – Gulu Road at km 0+115 LHS		Side ditches backfilled by residents to regain access to their properties along Gulu – Gulu Road			
Management Response It is also true that at the time of this audit, the drainage was not yet completed but now the contractor has remobilized and resumed the site with interest to finish the work as per their work schedule here attached. Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.					
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure (i) Observed functionality and usageAt the time of audit, the roads were complete and in use. For sections where stone pitched side ditches were constructed on Gulu – Gulu Road, access to people’s residence was cut off leading to some residents backfilling the ditches with hard core to regain access. Side ditches on entire Badrudin road and part of Gulu – Gulu Road were excavated but works abandoned before executing the planned stone pitching. With the exception of the cross culvert at the beginning of Gulu – Gulu road, the rest of the cross culverts are substantially silted and their inlets and outlets covered in bushes.				The Municipality should engage the Contractor to remobilise and complete the outstanding drainage works and rectify defects.	
Management Response It is true that at the time of this audit, the contractor had not finished working on the stone pitching and accesses in some sections of the roads for residence. The contractor is now at site and is working to complete the project which includes the stone pitching, accesses and de-silting of the cross culverts. Attached is their schedule of work for audit verification. Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.					
(i) Environmental and Social Impact Safeguards, health andAssessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safetysafety requirements and actions The contract BoQ indicated that it was planned to plant 40 trees in(c)	Poor project management.		Environmental degradation.	The Municipality should put in place measures to ensure fulfilment of Environmental and Social Impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions	




49











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
total i.e. 20 trees on each of the roads. No provision was made for grassing in the BoQ. However, the audit team did not see the trees.Therefore, the audit team concluded that there was no physical evidence of implementation of environmental safeguards.			on every project and detailed reports prepared accordingly.	
This forms part of the completion/ final works to be done during this project. Since the contractor is now back at site to complete the work, we shall ensure that the trees are planted, road marks and road signs are installed before the council finally receive the completed projects.Management ResponseAuditor’s remarks To be followed up.				
Physical evidence of satisfactory implementation of social/ safety measures Road marking and signage were provided in the BoQ but the works were abandoned prior to implementation of these safety features. Therefore, there was no physical evidence of implementation of social and safety measures.(ii)			The Municipality engage the Contractor to remobilise and complete the outstanding works.	
remarks To be followed up.Management Response This forms part of the completion/ final works to be done during this project. Since the contractor is now back at site to complete the work, we shall ensure that road marks and road signs are installed before the council finally receive the completed projects.Auditor’s				




50











3.3

Project Title: Construction of 1block of 2 Units Teacher’s House at Pece primary school

3.3.1 Contract Details

T able 3.3-1: Project details

Project Name	Construction of 1 Block of 2 Units Teacher’s House at Pece Primary School.	
Procurement Reference Number	Gulu 754/wrks/2018-2019/00004	
Implementing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	DDEG	
Contract Supervisor	Assistant Municipal Engineer	
Works contractor	M/s BUILD SKILLS CONSULT LIMITED	
Contract sign date	05/02/2019	
Contract Commencement date	18/02/2019	
Original contract period	4 months	
Intended completion date	30/06/2019	
Practical Completion date	06/06/2019	
Contract Sum	76,731,100	
Revised contract sum	76,731,100	
% progress reported	100% Complete	




3.3.2 Scope of Works

The scope of the works as contained in the implemented BoQ and drawings comprised construction of:

- Construction of a splash apron
- Window, doors, floor finishes and wall finishes;
- Roof covering and finishes
- Lightning protection and electrical installation.
- Electrical wiring, fittings, earthing

 Plumbing

3.3.3 Status of the project at the time of Audit

At the time of audit, Works were complete and the staff house had been put to its intended use.

		
Status photographs of staff house at Pece Primary school.		














3.3.4 Assessment of Economy The score on economy was 25.89 out of 30 as detailed below;

(a) Assessment of the variation in planned and executed quantities across municipalities. (i) Percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and Final Implemented quantities

A review was made of quantities of the selected items in the Engineer’s Estimates and Final Implemented for the DDEG project. The results of the assessment are presented in the table 3.3-2 below;

T able 3.3-2: Percentage difference between quantities in the engineer’s estimate and final i mplementation

Bill Item Description	Uni t	Quantit y in Enginee r's Estimat e Qe	Final Implemen ted Quantity Qf	Absolu te % Diff. betwe en Qf and Qe (F)	Maximu m allowabl e percenta ge differenc e (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipal ity (Max. Score for all 5 items is 10)	Scores of this Project S=2*(Fm /F)	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	178.00	177.39	0.34%	25%	2.00	2.00	
Internal Plaster	m 2	461.00	461.00	0.00%	25%	2.00	2.00	
230mm walling	m 2	99.00	99.00	0.00%	25%	2.00	2.00	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	235.00	235.00	0.00%	25%	2.00	2.00	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	4.30	2.98	30.80%	25%	2.00	1.62	
TOTAL SCORE:						10.00	9.62	














T able 3.3-3: Percentage difference between engineer’s unit cost and contracted unit cost

Physical Cost per Unit Area from Engineer's Estimate (Ce)	Physical Cost per Unit Area from Contract (Cc)	Absolute % Diff. Between Ce and Cc (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 5*(Fm/F)	
446,015	437,685	1.87%	15.00%	5	5.00	




The Municipality scored 5.00 out of 5.

From the table above, the absolute percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost was 1.87% which was within the allowable percentage difference.

ii) Percentage difference between the Contracted unit cost and the Final Implemented unit cost

A review was made of the Contracts and the Final Implementation records for the DDEG project. The results of the assessment are presented in table 3.3-4 below;

T able 3.3-4: Percentage difference between contracted unit cost and final implemented unit

cost

Physical Cost per Unit Area from contract (Cc)	Physical Cost per Unit Area - from Final Implementation (Ci)	Absolute % Diff. between Cc & Ci (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 15*(Fm/F)	
437,685	525,032	19.96%	15.00%	15	11.27	




The Municipality scored 11.27 out of 15.

From the table above, the absolute percentage difference between the contracted unit cost and the final implemented unit cost of 19.96% was higher than the maximum allowable percentage difference.











3.3.5 Assessment of Efficiency The score on efficiency was 26.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(a) Assessment of progress of works against time(i) Assessment of physical progress lag as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress.According to the contract and commencement order issued on 11 th February, 2019, works were planned to be executed and completed within a period of 4 months from 15 th February, 2019 to 30 th June, 2019. Records on file indicated that works commenced on 15 th February, 2019 and were completed by 06 th June, 2019 implying that three was no physical progress lag.	N/A	OK	OK	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works(i) Presence of detailed measurement sheetsClause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments. The Auditor observed that measurement sheets for the value of works executed were not on the management file.	Poor project management.	Failure to know the actual quantity of work done upon which payment should have been effected.	The Accounting Officer should ensure that detailed measurement sheets are prepared and attached to the payment certificates.	
Management Response It is true that at the time of preparation of the certificates of payments, the Engineer relied on the quantities in the Bill of Quantities to prepare the certificates of payment. This came about because of the capacity gaps in the Engineering department. Management is working hard to breach these capacity gaps by recruiting more staff in the Engineering department and planned to support refresher courses for staff in the Engineering department to boost their performance in the subsequent contracts. Attached is the submission letter to District Service Commission of Gulu for recruitment of the principal Engineer.				
Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.				




54











Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

(ii) Payments above certified amounts

Audit review of the available payment voucher showed that the N/A payments made to the contractor were consistent with certified amounts.

OK OK

Item Amount submitted Amount certified (UGX) Date Approved Amount paid Date of Remarks IPC No. (UGX)

(UGX) payment

1 9,935,236 23,019,330 27-Feb-19 9,935,236 27-Feb-19 OK 2 28,200,000 30,000,000 9-May-19 28,200,000 9-May-19 OK 3 30,325,145 36,161,700 28-Jun-19 30,325,145 2-Jul-19 OK

(iii) Physical verifications to check overpayments

The audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were compared with the quantities certified for payment as presented in the table below.

An overpayment of UGX 646,720 was obtained which is 0.8% of the final contract amount.

The municipality should ensure that Financial loss the overpayment of UGX 646,720 is recovered.

Item Unit Rate (UGX) Payment Audit Difference Amount Remarks quantity quantity between Over Paid Audit & Paid

Gauge 28 roof covering fixed to purlins (4(g) m 2

Quantities 20,000 178 177 1 20000 Over payments Ditto but ridges (4(h) m 15,000 20 17.44 2.56 38,400 Over payments Ditto: 1200**1200mm for kitchen (5(b) no. 300,000 2 1 1 300,000 Over payments Ditto but roughcasting (6(e.)

m 2 8,000 71 64 7 56000 Over payments Weather guard emulsion paint to external walls (6(g) m 2

Management Response

8,000 105 73.71 31.29 250320 Over payments Total sum. 646,720 Total Payment (Final Contract Amount): 76,731,100 %percentage overpayments 0.8%

Upon our physical verification on the building at site, we confirmed that the building is a two units’ staff house and each unit had a kitchen fitted with a window here marked as (ditto 1200**1200mm for kitchen (5(b)) fixed on the building which costed about UGX 300,000= each. Attached is the As-built drawing and

55











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
photographic evidence for audit verification. It is also true that we painted our exterior walls with weather guard paints and this included the two gabble ends here marked as (Weather guard emulsion paint to external walls (6(g). in our assessment of the work done, the over payment does not exist or may be negligible.				
Auditor’s remarks The management response was not accompanied with verifiable evidence of detailed measurement sheets showing how paid quantities were arrived at.				
(iv) Timeliness in PaymentsThe Auditor noted that the Municipality made payment to the contractor of the certified amounts within the contractual timeline of 30 days from date of receipt of the payment request.	N/A	OK	OK	
(c) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements(i) Preparation of progress reportsBased on a commencement date of 18 th February 2019 and expected completion date of 30 th June 2019 and contractual monthly progress reporting requirement, the audit team expected to find four (4) monthly progress reports. All 4 monthly progress reports were on file though they did not detail all key aspects of the project.	Poor project management	Lack of information/ data which limits stakeholders from making informed decisions	The Accounting officer should put measures to ensure that quality progress reports addressing all key project aspects are always prepared for all projects.	
Management Response We concur with the audit findings. This was due to the capacity gaps in the Engineering department and shall improve on that by supporting them through a refresher course for better reporting in the subsequent projects.				
Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.				
(ii) Presence of site meeting minutesFrom the audit review of the contract management files, only minutes ofsite meeting held on 20 th June 2019 were availed to the auditor.			The Municipality and contracted service providers should hold regular site meetings to assess works progress and timely devise solutions to challenges.	




56











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(iii) Approved supervising personnel on siteThe auditor observed that the Municipality appointed the Assistant municipal Engineer (Mr. Ojok Christopher) as the project manager to supervise the project works.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of the audit, all equipment had been demobilized.	N/A	OK	OK	
(d) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements during project closure(i) Presence of detailed certificate of completion.From the audit review of the contract management files, it was discovered that no detailed completion certificate had been issued with an accompanying snag list.	Poor project management.	Rectification of snags may not be done effectively.	The municipality should inspect works at completion and identify any defects then issue the completion certificate accompanied by a snag list..	
Management Response It is true that at the time of audit, the certificate of completion was filed in the voucher files and could not be examined by the auditors. They are now available for audit verification.				
Auditor’s remarks Completion certificate not availed for verification.				
(ii) Presence of As-built drawings and Maintenance ManualsThe as-built drawings were not available on the project management file. Clause GCC 58.1 of special conditions of contract demands the issuance of As-built drawings on Practical completion date, which was not adhered to. The contract however did not specify who was to prepare the as built drawings.	Poor contract formulation.	Lack of as-built drawings may hinder economic and effective future maintenance interventions.	The Special Conditions of Contract need to clearly indicate the need for as- built drawings and specify the person in charge of their production.	
Management Response We concur with the audit findings. This was due to the capacity gaps in the Engineering department and shall improve on that by supporting them through recruitment of more staff in the department a refresher courses for a better result in the subsequent projects. Attached is the submission letter for recruitment of a				




57











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
principal Engineer to the District Service Commission of Gulu for audit verifications.				
Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.				
(iii) Percentage of DLP progress / monitoring reportsAt the time of the audit, it was observed that inspections had been carried out and observed defects rectified.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iv) Presence of Defects Liability Certificate.The contractual due date for issuing of the Defects Liability Certificate was 30/01/2020. However, it was noted that by the time of auditing on 15 th to 20 th August 2020, it had not yet been issued.	Poor project management in the project closure phase.		The municipality should ensure that works are inspected at the end of DLP to ascertain that all defects are rectified and a defects liability certificate issued.	
Management Response The defects liability certificate was filed in the voucher files and was not accessed by the auditors during their work but has been retrieved and is hereby attached for audit verification.				
Auditor’s remarks The municipality provided an IPC certificate instead of a DLP certificate.				




58











3.3.6 Assessment of Effectiveness The score on effectiveness was 30.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding		Cause	Implication			Recommendation		
The Municipality should ensure that materials to be used in the permanent works are tested to avoid using materials that do not meet specification.It poses a risk of use of materials that do not conform to the specifications.(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementation(i) Material test results on file Poor project managementReview of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results and approved quality control and Quality Assurance document on file.								
Management Response It is true that the material testing was not done and was not included in the bill of quantities. This is due to the capacity gaps noted in the Engineering department and we shall improve on that through refresher courses and through recruitment of more staff in the department for improvement in the subsequent projects.								
Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.								
(ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specificationsSome of the work items were checked by the audit team to ascertain to and specifications. All the checks done were okay representing showed 100% conformance.conformance design drawings								
								
Projects	Structure or Layer Tested			Auditors Result	Specification		Comment	
								
Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher’s House at Pece Primary School (SFG)	Rafter/Tie Beam			95x40	100x50		OK	
	Wall Thickness			150	230		OK	
	Plaster thickness			15.3	15		OK	
	Roof Gauge			G28	G28		OK	




59











Finding				Cause		Implication		Recommendation				
(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to SpecificationsThe audit team conducted in-situ testing of the various components of the works to determine the concrete compressive strength and compare with the specifications. The results are shown in the table below. Twelve tests conducted on Access Ramp, Veranda and splash Apron passed representing 100% conformance.												
In-situ Tests Equipment /Tools Projects Structure or Layer Tested Specification CommentConcrete compressive strengthSchmidt HammerConstruction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher’s House at Pece Primary School (SFG)Access Ramp Access Ramp Access Ramp Access Ramp Veranda Veranda Veranda Veranda Splash Apron Splash Apron Splash Apron Splash ApronAuditors Result 30.0 27.0 22.0 32.0 27.0 30.0 28.0 30.0 27.0 27.0 27.0 26.020 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defectsThe completed works were inspected on 15 th August, 2020 in the presence of a staff from Gulu Municipal Council Engineer’s office. The works were complete by thetime of audit.. The following minor defects were observed;(iv)												
												




60











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Cracks in the splash apron Broken door handle Cracks in the ceiling				
It is true that at the time of this audit, we noted some cracks on the splash apron, ceilings and a broken door handle due to usage as the building is now put to use by the management. The defects were corrected by the contractor since the building was still within the defects liability period. Attached in the inspections’ report is the photographic evidence for audit verification.Management Response				
Auditor’s remarks Correction of defects not clearly evidenced.				
(b) Assessment of the utilization of the infrastructure(i) Observed functionality and usageAt the time of audit, the construction works were complete and the two unit teachers’ house was under use asN/A OK OK				




61











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
intended.				
(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety(i) Environmental and Social Impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actionsThere were some reports on file indicating compliance to environmental and social safeguards, health and safety of workers during the construction period. The grassing that was supposed to be done around the structure was satisfactorily done from the site inspection.	N/A	OK	OK	




62











3.4

Project Title: Renovation of Sacred Heart S.S. Dormitory

3.4.1 Contract Details

T able 3.4-1: Project details

Project Name	Renovation of Sacred Heart S.S Dormitory	
Project Reference Number	Gulu754/wrks/2018-2019/00007	
Client	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	SFG	
Contract Supervisor	Assistant Municipal Engineer	
Works contractor	Coal Covenant company limited	
Date of contract award	05/02/2019	
Contract sign date	05/02/2019	
Commencement date	15/02/2019	
Contract duration	4 months	
Expected Completion date	30/06/2019	
Contract Sum	UGX 219,944,910 (without 18% vat)	
% progress reported	100% Complete	




3.4.2 Scope of Works

The scope of the works included;

- Roof construction

 Fittings

 Finishes

- Lightning Arrestor
- Laying pavers to walk-ways

 Drainage

3.4.3 Status of the project at the time of audit

At the time of the audit (15/08/2020), Renovation of sacred heart dormitory was complete

		
Status photographs of Blue (Left) & City (right) Dormitory		














3.4.4 Assessment of Economy

This project being a renovation project with a unique scope, the comparison could not be made with municipalities that had fresh construction right from the foundation. Therefore, this project was scored less 30 marks for economy assessment but the final score was converted to out of 100 marks











3.4.5 Assessment of Efficiency The score on efficiency was 26.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(a) Assessment of progress of works against time(i) Assessment of physical progress lag (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress)According to the contract and commencement order issued on 11 th February, 2019, Works were planned to be executed and completed within a period of 4 months from 15 th February, 2019 to 30 th June, 2019. Works were complete by 28 th June, 2019 implying that there was no physical progress lag.	N/A	OK	OK	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works(i) Presence of detailed measurement sheetsClause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments.The Auditor observed that measurement sheets for the value of works executed were not on the management file.	Poor project management.	Failure to know the actual quantity of work done upon which payment should have been effected.	The Accounting Officer should ensure that detailed measurement sheets are prepared and attached to the payment certificates.	
Management Response It is true that at the time of preparation of the certificates of payments, the Engineer relied on the quantities in the Bill of Quantities to prepare the certificates of payment. This came about because of the capacity gaps in the Engineering department. Management is working hard to breach this capacity gaps by recruiting more staff in the Engineering department and planned to support refresher courses for staff in the Engineering department to boost their performance in the subsequent contracts. Attached is the copy of the submission letter for recruitment of the Principal engineer to the District Service Commission of Gulu.				




65











Finding					Cause		Implication			Recommendations			
Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.													
(ii) Payments above certified amountsAudit review of the available payment voucher showed that the payments made to the contractor were consistent with certified amounts.					N/A		OK			OK			
Item IPC No.1IPC No.2 IPC No.3Amount submitted (UGX) 51,781,31063,782,882 77,146,77327/02/201913/05/2019 11/06/2019Date submitted Amount Date of approval Amount paid (UGX) Remarks certified (UGX) 55,086,500 27/02/2019 55,086,50067,854,130 85,064,99413/05/2019 11/06/201963,782,882 85,064,994Date of payment 14/03/201924/05/2019 15/06/2019OKOK OK													
													
													
													
													
													
The audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were compared to the quantities certified for payment as presented in the table below.(iii) Physical verifications to check overpaymentsAn overpayment of UGX 5,794,000 was obtained which is 2.63% of the final contract amount.							Financial loss			The municipality should ensure that the overpayment of UGX 5,794,000 is recovered.			




66











Finding			Cause			Implication			Recommendations		
Item Checked Unit		Rate (UGX)		Payment quantity	Audit Quantity		Difference between Audit & Paid	AmountOver PaidRemarks			
							Quantities				
25*225mm fascia and barge board no. 26,000 98 87 11 286,000 Over payment											
Gauge 28 fixed to purlinm 2 27,000 1560 1388 172 4,644,000 Over payment											
Prepare walkway by hacking using manual hoeand levelling to gentle slope to receive murramm 2 2,000 517 409 108 216,000 Over payment											
Labour for laying paversm 2 6,000 517 409 108 648,000 Over payment											
Total Overpayment: 5,794,000 Total Payment (Final Contract Amount): 219,944,910 % Overpayment: 2.63% Management response is true that our scope of work covered the following areas; roofing with 28 gauge corrugated iron sheets, replacing part of the roofing timbers of 4x2 numbering to 171 pieces, levelling, putting murram and paving of the walk ways, casting in-situ concrete drain of 600mm, general painting of both interior and exterior walls, repair of floor areas of one cubical in city dormitory and fixed new mosquito nets in the ventilators as per the attached bill of quantities here attached for audit verification. While the scope mentioned by the audit team to include walling and interior plastering of wall of 230mm and reinforced concretes were not part of the contracts. When we verified, we discovered that there is no over payment and our vouchers are here attached for audit verification.											
											
											
											
Auditor’s remarks overpayment was derived from components that were within the project scope. The municipality did not provide evidence to show otherwise.											
Timeliness in Payments43.1 clearly stated that payment to the contractor was to be effected thirty (30) days after certification of works. Review of the payment documents to the contractor indicated that payments were made in time as shown in the table in b(ii) above.N/A OK OK											




It

The

(iv) GCC

67











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Arrangements(c) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring(i) Preparation of progress reportsSection 5 of the supervision contract required the contract Supervisor to prepare and submit monthly progress reports to the Client. According to the commencement date of 15 th February, 2019 and the expected completion date of 30 th June, 2019, the auditor expected to find four progress reports based on the contractual monthly progress reporting requirement. It was observed that only one of the monthly progress reports was available on file.	Poor project management	Lack of information/data which limits stakeholders from making informed decisions.	The Accounting officer should put measures to ensure that quality progress reports addressing all key project aspects are always prepared for all projects.	
(ii) Presence of site meeting minutes Section 5 of the Supervision Contract required that the contract Supervisor convenes regular meetings with the Contractor to discuss progress and update work plans as necessary. Furthermore, clause 31.2 of the works contract required the Project Manager to record the business of the management meetings. The audit team observed that there were minutes of site meetings on file.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iii) Approved supervising personnel on siteThe Municipality appointed the Assistant Municipal engineer (Mr. Ojok Christopher) as a Contract Supervisor.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iv) Approved equipment on siteAt the time of the audit, the works had been completed and no equipment on site. However, document review showed that adequate equipment was mobilised during construction.	N/A	OK	OK	
(d) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements during project closure (i) Presence of detailed certificate of completion. From the audit review of the contract management files, it was discovered that detailed completion certificate had been issued however, without an accompanying snag list.		Rectification of snags may not be done effectively.	The municipality should inspect works before issuance of the certificate of completion and identify any defects which make the snag list that should accompany the completion certificate.	




68











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(ii) Presence of As-built drawings and Maintenance ManualsThe as-built drawings were not prepared and were not available on the project management file. Clause GCC 58.1 of special conditions of contract exclude the issuance of As-built drawings on Practical completion date which was not also adhered to.	Poor contract formulation.	Lack of as-built drawings may hinder economic and effective future maintenance interventions.	The Special Conditions of Contract need to clearly indicate the need for as-built drawings and specify the person in charge of their production.	
Management Response There were no As-built drawings because the building existed and no change was made to the building. We only reinforced/ added strength to the structure.				
Auditor’s remarks Applicability of as-built drawing should always be put as a requirement in the special conditions of the contract since they are essential for maintenance.				
(iii) Percentage of DLP progress / monitoring reportsAccording to the contract DLP supervision was a due period of 180 days. At the time of the audit, it was observed that one inspection had been carried out and there was a DLP monitoring report.	N/A	OK	OK	
Management Response We concur with the audit finding. We shall adhere to the audit recommendation above.				
Auditor’s remarks To be followed in the subsequent projects.				
(iv) Presence of Defects Liability Certificate. The contractual due date for issuing of the Defects Liability Certificate was 30 th January 2020. However, it was noted that the defects liability certificate had not yet been issued.	Poor project management in the project closure phase.		The municipality should ensure that works are inspected at the end of DLP to ascertain that all defects are rectified and a defects liability certificate issued.	
Management Response The delay in issuing the liability certificate was due to defects that were identified during the DLP on the floor and corrections were recommended by the engineer. The retention was paid after the corrections were made. Attached is the engineers’ letter and the photograph of the corrected floor for audit verification.				
Auditor’s remarks The defects liability certificate was not availed for verification.				




69











3.4.6 Assessment of Effectiveness The score on effectiveness was 19.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding		Cause		Implication		Recommendation		
The Municipality should ensure that materials to be used in the permanent works are tested to avoid using materials that do not meet specification.It poses a risk of use of materials that do not conform to the specifications.Poor project managementAssessment of the quality of works under implementationMaterial test results on fileReview of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results on file.								
Management Response is true that material testing was not done and was not included in the bill of quantities. This is due to the capacity gaps noted in the Engineering department we shall improve on that through refresher courses and through recruitment of more staff in the department for improvement in the subsequent projects.								
Auditor’s remarks be followed up.								
N/A OK OKConformance of site works to design drawings and physical specificationsSome of the work items were checked on site by the audit team to ascertain conformance to design drawings and specifications. All the Items checked conformed to the specifications/drawings as presented in the table below;								
No.	Items		Drawings / Specifications		Field Checks / measurements		Remarks	
1	Roof covering		Gauge 28		Gauge 28		OK	
2	Window size (burglar proof)		1450mm x 1200mm		1470mm x 1220mm		OK	
3	Fabricate 1.2mm thick metallic casement doors.		0.86m x 2140mm		862mmx 2142mm		OK	
Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications audit team conducted in-situ testing of the various components of the concrete compressive strength and compared with the specifications. 9 the 11 tests passed representing 81.82% conformance as shown in the table below;the works to determine(iii)								




(a) (i)

It and To (ii)

The of

70











Finding				Cause		Implication			Recommendation			
In-situ Tests Equipment /Tools Projects Structure or Layer Tested Specification CommentAccess Ramp Access Ramp Access Ramp Access Ramp Drainage Drainage Drainage Drainage Slab Cover Slab Cover Slab CoverAuditors Result 22.0 26.0 27.0 25.0 25.0 28.0 19.0 20.0 28.0 19.0 20.020 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Passed Failed Passed Passed Failed PassedConcrete compressive strength Schmidt HammerRenovation of Sacred Hearts SSS Dormitory (SFG)												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
Response This work was just a renovation of already an existing structure of which our work added strength to the building hence will last longer. The major component of the work was to change the leaking roof of the two dormitories with better ones. Attached are the photographs.Management												
Auditor’s remarks The components checked by audit were part of drainage that was within the scope.												
(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defectsThe completed works were inspected on 16 th August 2020 in the presence of a staff from Gulu Municipal Council Engineer’s. The following minor defects were observed;												




71











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Partition wall turned into a pit Ceiled Exit Door				
It is true the accounting officer advice the head teacher during the site meeting to seal off the partition walls as this was not part of the contract. Attached is theminutes extract.Management Response				
Auditor’s remarks To be followed up.				
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure(i) Observed functionality and usageAt the time of audit, the construction works were complete but the structure had not been put to its intended use yet as pupils were away from school due to school closure as result of the Covid-19 pandemic. However, audit noted that structure will serve its intended purpose.				
Environmental degradationThe Municipality should ensure that environmental protection measures are always adhered(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety(i) Environmental and Social Impact Safeguards,				




72











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
health and safety requirements and actionsIt was noted that there was no sufficient evidence of environmental intervention in the implementation of the project. The partition wall that was meant for partition turned into a composite pit since it was not satisfactorily done from the site inspection.			to.	
Management Response Trees were planted in and around the renovated dormitories by the contractor as per the given number in the bill of quantities. It is true that the partition wall was not part of the BoQ and attached is the copy of the BoQ for audit verification.				
Auditor’s remarks. The management response was not accompanied with a verifiable evidence of photos of trees planted around the dormitory.				




73











3.5

Project Title: Construction of 2-unit Teacher’s house & flush toilet at Christ Church p/s

3.5.1 Contract details

T able 3.4- 1: Project details

Project Name	Construction of 2-unit Teacher’s house & flush toilet at Christ Church p/s	
Project ReferenceNumber	Gulu754/wrks/2018-2019/00003	
Client	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	SFG	
Contract Supervisor	Assistant Municipal Engineer	
Works contractor	Stanhope construction and general Merchandise	
Date of contract award	28/01/2019	
Contract sign date	05/02/2019	
Commencement date	15/02/2019	
Contract duration	4 months	
Expected Completion date	30/06/2019	
Contract Sum	UGX 90,071,000	
% progress reported	100% Complete	




3.5.2 Scope of Works

The scope of the works included;

 Substructure;

- Super structure;
- Roof structure;

 Doors;

- Internal and external finishes and;

 Drainage

3.5.3 Status of the project at the time of audit

At the time of the audit (15 th August, 2020), Construction 1 block of two units teacher’s house & 2 stances pour flush toilet at Christ church P/S.

		
Status photographs of the staff house & 2stances pour flash.		














3.5.4 Assessment of Economy The score on economy was 0.00 out of 30 as detailed below;

a) Assessment of the variation in planned and executed quantities across municipalities i) Percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and Final Implemented quantities

A review was made of quantities of the selected items in the Engineer’s Estimates and Final Implemented for the DDEG project. The results of the assessment are presented in the table 3.4-2 below;

T able 3.4- 2: Percentage difference between quantities in the engineer’s estimate and final i mplementation

BillDescriptionItem	Uni t	Quantity in Engineer's Estimate Qe	Final Implemente d Quantity Qf	Diff.Absolute % between Qf and Qe (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipalit y (Max. Score for all 5 items is 10)	Scores of this Project S=2*(Fm/ F)	
Roofing(gauge 28)Sheets	m 2	Not availed	Not availed		25%	2.00	0.00	
Internal Plaster	m 2	Not availed	Not availed		25%	2.00	0.00	
230mm walling	m 2	Not availed	Not availed		25%	2.00	0.00	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	Not availed	Not availed		25%	2.00	0.00	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	Not availed	Not availed		25%	2.00	0.00	
TOTAL SCORE:						10.00	0.00	




The Municipality scored 0.00 out of 10.

From the table above, the municipality’s percentage difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and final implemented quantities for all the five items could not be assessed since the quantities were not availed to the audit team.











b) Assessment of the variation in unit prices for works of similar nature

(i) Percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost

A review was made of the Engineer’s Estimates and Final Implementation for the DDEG project. The results of the assessment are presented in table 3.4-3 below;

T able 3.4-1: Percentage difference between engineer’s unit cost and contracted unit cost

Physical Cost per Unit Area from Engineer's Estimate (Ce)	Physical Cost per Unit Area from Contract (Cc)	Absolute % Diff. Between Ce (F)and Cc	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 5*(Fm/F)	
Not availed	494,816	N/A	15.00%	5	0.00	




The Municipality scored 0.00 out of 5.

From the table above, the percentage difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost was not assessed since the Engineer’s estimate was not availed to the audit team.

Management Response

It is true that at the time of this audit, some documents were not availed for examination by the audit team. This was because some of the documents were filed in the project files and kept in the procurement unit.

We have retrieved the inspection reports, payment certificates, BoQ and measurement sheets from those files and now here attached for audit verification

Auditor comment

No evidence was availed to the audit team for verification.

(ii) Percentage difference between the Contracted unit cost and the Final Implemented unit cost

A review was made of the Engineer’s Estimates and Final Implementation for the DDEG project. The results of the assessment are presented in table 3.4-4 below;

Physical Cost per Unit Area from contract (Cc)	Physical Cost per Unit Area - from Final Implementation (Ci)	Absolute % Diff. between Cc & Ci (F)	Maximum allowable percentage difference (Fm)	Max. Score of Municipality	Score of this project S = 15*(Fm/F)	
494,816	Not available	Not availed	15.00%	15	0.00	














Management Response

It is true that at the time of this audit, some documents were not availed for examination by the audit team. This was because some of the documents were filed in the project files and kept in the procurement unit.

We have retrieved the inspection reports, payment certificates, BoQ and measurement sheets from those files and now here attached for audit verification

Auditor comment

No evidence was availed to the audit team for verification.











3.5.5 Assessment of Efficiency The score on efficiency was 8.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(a) Assessment of progress of works against time(i) Assessment of physical progress lag (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress)According to the contract and commencement order issued on 11 th February, 2020, works were planned to be executed and completed within a period of 04 months from 15 th February, 2019 to 30 th June, 2019. However, there is no work plan, progress report and/or completion report to assess physical progress. The audit team therefore could not determine the physical progress due to insufficient information.	Poor project management		The Accounting Officer should ensure that work plans, progress and completion reports are prepared to assist in project monitoring.	
Management Responses The progress report was not prepared due to capacity gaps in the Engineering department. The management planned to recruit more staff in the department and submission has already been made to the District Service Commission of Gulu for recruitment. Attached is the copy of the submission letter. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works(ii) Presence of detailed measurement sheetsClause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments.The auditor observed that there were no detailed measurement sheets attached to the contractor’s payment certificates.	Poor project management.	Failure to know the actual quantity of work done upon which payment should have been effected.	The Municipality should always measure the works and the detailed measurement sheets are prepared and attached to payment certificates.	




78











Finding			Cause		Implication		Recommendations		
									
Response concur with the audit findings. We shall implement the audit recommendations. Auditor’s Remarks be followed up.Management									
The municipality should improve on document management and avail the missing documents.Payments above certified amountsPayment vouchers were not availed to the Auditor to determine consistence of payments certified with the certified amounts.Poor document management.The municipality cannot give full accountability for the funds									
Item	Amount submitted (UGX)	Date submitted		Amount paid (UGX)		Date of payment		Remarks	
IPC No.1 8,004,044 29/04/2019 Missing Vouchers									
IPC No.2 13,963,600 9/06/2019 Missing Vouchers									
Response is true that the documents were not availed to the team at the time of audit as they were filed in the project implementation files that were not availed to the auditors at the time of this audit. They have now been retrieved and are available for audit verifications. Auditor’s Remarks Payment vouchers not availed for verification.Management									
Physical verifications to check overpaymentsaudit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities some of the works and these were to be compared with the certified quantities.overpayment of UGX 1,607,380 was obtained which is 1.7% of final contract amount.Loss of fundsThe Municipality should ensure that the overpayment of UGX 1,607,380 is recovered.									




We To (iii)

It

(iv)

The of

An the

79











Finding				Cause			Implication		Recommendations		
											
Item	Unit	Rate (UGX)	Payment quantity		Audit quantity	Difference between Audit & Paid		Amount Over Paid		Remarks	
						Quantities					
Gauge 28 roof covering fixed withrubber washers fixed to purlinsm 2 32,000 178 173 5 160,000											
Ditto but ridges m 20,000 20 17.30 2.7 54,000											
15mm thick cement sand mix 1:4 but rough casting at 2m high at gable end and 1.2m high at rear viewm 2 4,000 71 61 10 40,000											
Weather guard emulsion paint toexternal wallm 2 8,000 105 86 19 152,000											
50*100mm rafters m 10,000 21 4.8 16.2 162,000											
50*75mm purlins m 10,000 21 11.6 9.4 94,000											
25*225mm fascia and barge board m 22,000 28 10.60 17.4 382,800											
Gauge 28 roof covering fixed withrubber washers fixed to purlinsm 2 45,000 19.2 6.96 12.34 555,300											
15mm thick cement sand mix 1:4but roughcasting using both green and black oxidem 2 8,000 16.8 16.67 0.13 1,040											
Weather guard rafenso global paint toexternal wallm 2 8,000 16.8 16.02 0.78 6,240											
Total sum overpaid Total Payment (Final Contract Amount): % percentage overpayments1,607,380 90,071,000 1.7%											
											
											
Upon our verifications, we noted that there is no over payments made to the contractor. Attached are our documents for verification. Auditor’s Remarks evidence availed for verification.Management Response											
Timeliness in PaymentsWorks Contract provided that the Employer shall payPoor documents/ records managementThe municipality cannot give full accountability for the fundsThe municipality should improve on document management and avail all											




Overpayments

No (v) The 80











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Contractor’s IPC within 30 days of receipt and certification by the Project Manager. Review of payment documents revealed that only two (2) IPCs were submitted by the contractor. However, the certified payment vouchers were not availed.			missing documents.	
Management response We concur with the audit findings and shall implement the audit recommendations made. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(c) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements(i) Preparation of progress reportsSection 5 of the supervision contract required the contract Supervisor to prepare and submit monthly progress reports to the Client. There were no progress reports on file.	Poor project management.	Lack of information/ data which limits stakeholders from making informed decisions.	The Accounting officer should put measures to ensure that quality progress reports addressing all key project aspects are always prepared for all projects.	
Management Response It is true, there is no progress report in the file. This was because of the capacity gaps in the Engineering Department and management is working to correct it by supporting the refresher course training of the Engineering staff. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
Presence of site meeting minutesSection 5 of the Supervision Contract required that the contract Supervisor convenes regular meetings with the Contractor to discuss progress and update work plans as necessary. Furthermore, clause 31.2 of the works contract required the Project Manager to record the business of the management meetings. There were no minutes of site meetings on file.(ii)	Poor project management and administration.	Project bottlenecks cannot be discussed in time.	The Accounting Officer should ensure that site meeting are held and their respective minutes should be prepared.	
Management Responses It is true that we held site meetings during the implementation of the contract but the files were not availed to the audit team.				




81











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(iii) Approved supervising personnel on siteThe Municipality appointed the Assistant Municipal engineer (Mr Ojok Christopher) as a Contract Supervisor.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iv) Approved equipment on siteAt the time of the audit, the works had been completed and no equipment on site. However, document review showed that adequate equipment was mobilised during construction.	N/A	OK	OK	
(d) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements during project closure(i) Presence of detailed certificate of completion.From the audit review of the contract management files, it was discovered that no detailed completion certificate had been issued.	Poor project management.	Rectification of snags may not be done effectively.	The municipality should inspect works after completion to identify any defects and then issue a detailed completion certificate accompanied with a snag list.	
Manage Response The detailed certificate of completion was not prepared by the engineering department due to capacity gaps and the management is working to build the capacity of the staff in the department through recruitment and refresher trainings. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(ii) Presence of As-built drawings and Maintenance ManualsThe as-built drawings were not prepared and were not available on the project management file. Clause GCC 58.1 of special conditions of contract requires the issuance of As-built drawings on practical completion date which was not even adhered to. The contract however did not specify who was to prepare the as built drawings.	Poor contract formulation.	Lack of as-built drawings may hinder economic and effective future maintenance interventions.	The Special Conditions of Contract need to clearly indicate the need for as-built drawings and specify the person in charge of their production.	
Management Response				




82











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
The As-built drawings were not done because of capacity gaps in the department and management is working towards building their capacity for improved performance in the subsequent project works. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(iii) Percentage of DLP progress / monitoring reportsAccording to the contract, DLP was 180 days. At the time of the audit, it was observed that no inspections had been carried out and there were no DLP monitoring report on file.	Poor project management	There may be a missed opportunity to identify developing defects and rectifying them at the earliest.	The Municipality should ensure that DLP inspections are conducted, snag lists updated, and reports made on its future projects.	
Management Response The reports were not prepared and management shall implement the audit recommendations. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(iv) Presence of Defects Liability Certificate.The contractual due date for issuing of the Defects Liability Certificate was 30/01/2020. However, it was noted that the defects liability certificate had not yet been issued by audit time.	Poor project management in the project closure phase.		The municipality should ensure that works are inspected at the end of DLP to ascertain that all defects are rectified and a defects liability certificate issued.	
Management Response The certificate was not prepared and management shall implement the audit recommendations. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				




83











3.5.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 17.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementation (i) Material test results on file

Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results.

Management Response

The Municipality should Poor project

It poses a risk of use of ensure that materials to be management

materials that do not used in the permanent conform to the works are tested to avoid specifications. using materials that do not meet specification.

It is true that the material testing was not done and was not included in the bill of quantities. This is due to the capacity gaps noted in the Engineering department and we shall improve on that through refresher courses and through recruitment of more staff in the department for improvement in the subsequent projects.

Auditor’s Remarks

To be followed up.

(ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications Some of the work items were checked by the audit team to ascertain N/A conformance to design drawings and specifications. All the 5 items checked were ok representing 100% conformance as shown in the table below;

Projects

Structure or Layer Tested

OK OK

Auditors Result Specification Comment

Rafter/Tie Beam 900x50 90x40 OK Plus Wall Thickness 1500 150 OK 2Stances Pour flash Toilet at Plaster thickness Christ Church Primary School Roof Gauge

10 15 OK G28 G28 OK Roof Gauge G28 G28 OK

(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications

84











Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

The audit team conducted in-situ testing of the various components of the works to determine the concrete compressive strength and compare with the specifications. 18 out of 23 tests passed representing 78.26% conformance as shown in the table below;

In-situ Tests Equipment /Tools Projects

Structure or Layer Auditors Tested Result

Specification Comment

Concrete floor slab 18.0 20 Failed Concrete floor slab 25.0 20 Passed Ring Beam 35.0 25 Passed Ring Beam 36.0 25 Passed Ring Beam 32.0 25 Passed Ring Beam 23.0 25 Failed Access Ramp 20.0 20 Passed Access Ramp 20.0 20 Passed

Concrete compressive Schmidt Hammer strength

Access Ramp 23.0 20 Passed Construction of One Block of Two Units of Teacher’s Splash Apron 26.0 20 Passed House plus 2Stances Pour Splash Apron 18.0 20 Failed Flash Toilet at Christ Splash Apron 18.0 20 Failed Church Primary School Veranda 25.0 20 Passed (SFG) Veranda 28.0 20 Passed Slab Cover 26.0 20 Passed Slab Cover 28.0 20 Passed Window Sill 22.0 20 Passed Window Sill 25.0 20 Passed Access Ramp-Toilet 21.0 20 Passed Veranda-Toilet 23.0 20 Passed Veranda-Toilet 26.0 20 Passed Veranda-Toilet 19.0 20 Failed Slab Cover-Toilet 27.0 20 Passed

85











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Management Response We concur with the audit findings and shall implement the audit recommendations made. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defectsThe completed works were inspected on 16 th August, 2020 in the presence of a staff from Gulu Municipal Council Engineer’s office. The works were complete by the time of audit. The following minor defects were observed;.Crack on the Gable End Crack on the splash Apron				
It is true that by audit time, there were some cracks on the apron and the gable walls. The cracks were corrected by the contractor before the payment of thelast certificates. Attached is the photographic evidence of the corrected gable and apron for the audit verification.ResponseAuditor’s RemarksEvidence of corrections made were not availed.Management				




86











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure (i) Observed functionality and usage At the time of audit inspection, the teachers’ house was already functioning and had been put to its intended use.	N/A	OK	OK	
(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety(i) Environmental and Social Impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actionsAt the time of audit, the works were complete. Reports were available regarding compliance to environmental, social, health and safety requirements during project implementation. However, these reports were not detailed enough for the audit to satisfactorily assess the implementation of environmental, social and safety measures.			The Municipality should put in place measures to ensure that the reports regarding compliance to environmental, social, health and safety requirements are detailed enough to include all the safeguards done during project implementation.	
Management Response We concur with the audit findings and shall implement the audit recommendations made. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				




87











3.6

Project Title: Completion of Pece division office block

3.6.1 Contract Details

T able 3.6-1: Project details

Project Name	Completion of Pece division office block	
Project ReferenceNumber	Gulu754/wrks/2018-2019/00005	
Client	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	DDEG	
Contract Supervisor	Assistant Municipal Engineer	
Works contractor	DAVICO GENERAL SUPPLIES & CONSTRUCTION U LTD	
Date of contract award	05/02/2019	
Contract sign date	05/02/2019	
Commencement date	15/02/2019	
Contract duration	4 months	
Expected Completion date	30/06/2019	
Contract Sum	UGX 59,030,475 (Vat Inclusive)	
% progress reported	100% Complete	




3.6.2 Scope of Works

The scope of the works included;

- Doors & windows;
- Internal and external finishes and;
- Plumbing works and electrical Installation.

3.6.3 Status of the project at the time of audit

At the time of the audit (15 th August, 2020), Completion of Pece division office block

		
Status photographs of Pece division office block		
		














3.6.5 Assessment of Efficiency The score on efficiency was 19.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(a) Assessment of progress of works against time(i) Assessment of physical progress lag as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progressAccording to the contract and commencement order issued on 11 th February, 2020, works were planned to be executed and completed within a period of 04 months from 15 th February 2019 to 30 th June, 2019. Works were complete by 25 th June 2019 implying that there was physical progress lag.	N/A	OK	OK	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed work(i) Presence of detailed measurement sheetsClause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments.The auditor observed that there were no measurement sheets for value of work executed and attached to the payment certificate.	Poor project management.	Failure to know the actual quantity of work done upon which payment should have been effected.	The Accounting Officer should ensure that detailed measurement sheets are prepared and attached to the payment certificates.	
Management Response It is true that at the time of preparation of the certificates of payments, Engineer relied on the quantities in the Bill of Quantities to prepare the certificates of payment. This came about because of the capacity gaps in the Engineering department. Management is working hard to breach this capacity gaps by recruiting more staff in the Engineering department and planned to support refresher courses for staff in the Engineering department to boost their performance in the subsequent contracts. Attached is the submission letter to District Service Commission of Gulu for recruitment of the principal Engineer.Remarks The attached letter has been seen. To be followed up.Auditor’s				




89











Finding					Cause		Implication			Recommendations			
(ii) Payments above certified amountsNo payments above certified amounts were noted.													
ItemIPC No.1Amount submitted (UGX) 16920000Date submitted Amount certified (UGX)Date approvalof Amount (UGX)paid Date of payment Remarks27/05/2019 16,920,000 27/05/2019 16,920,000 31/05/2019 OK													
													
													
													
Physical verifications to check overpaymentsThe audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the works and these were to be compared with the certified quantities. Records of certified quantities were not availed.(iii)					Poor document management.		The municipality cannot give full accountability for the funds.			The municipality should improve on document management and should avail the payment documents.			
Management Response It is true that during audit, some documents were wrongly filed and could not be easily traced for audit but now they are got and attached here for audit verification Auditor’s Remarks Certified quantities were not availed for verification.													
(iv) Timeliness in PaymentsGCC 43.1 clearly stated that payment to the contractor was to be effected thirty (30) days after certification of works. Review of the payment documents to the contractor indicated that payments were made in time as shown in table b(ii) above.					N/A		OK			OK			
(c) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements (i) Preparation of progress reports Section 5 of the supervision contract required the contract Supervisor to prepare and submit monthly progress reports to the Client. The auditor noted that there were no progress reports on file.					Poor project management		Lack of information/ data which limits stakeholders from making informed decisions.			The Accounting officer should put measures to ensure that quality progress reports addressing all key project aspects are always prepared for all projects.			




90











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Management Response It is true that the progress reports were not prepared due to some capacity gaps that management is working to correct in the subsequent projects. Auditor’s Remarks To be followed up.				
(ii) Presence of site meeting minutesSection 5 of the Supervision Contract required that the contract Supervisor convenes regular meetings with the Contractor to discuss progress and update work plans as necessary. Furthermore, clause 31.2 of the works contract required the Project Manager to record the business of the management meetings.audit team noted that there were no minutes of site meetings on fileThe	Poor project management and administration.	Project bottlenecks cannot be discussed in time.	The Accounting Officer should ensure that site meeting are held and their respective minutes should be prepared.	
(iii) Approved supervising personnel on siteThe Municipality appointed the Assistant Municipal engineer (Mr Ojok Christopher) as a Contract Supervisor.	N/A	OK	OK	
(iv) Approved equipment on siteAt the time of the audit, the works had been completed and no equipment on site. However, document review showed that adequate equipment was mobilised during construction.	N/A	OK	OK	
(d) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements during project closure (i) Presence of detailed certificate of completion. From the audit review of the contract management files, it was discovered that no detailed completion certificate had been issued.	Poor project management.	Rectification of snags may not be done effectively.	The municipality should inspect works after completion to identify any defects and then issue a detailed completion certificate accompanied with a snag list.	
Management Response These documents got lost and the police report is attached for audit consideration.				




91











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Auditor’s Remarks Police report has been seen, however back up of such important documents should always be made to avoid such outcomes.				
(ii) Presence of As-built drawings and Maintenance Manuals Clause GCC 58.1 of special conditions of contract includes the issuance of As-built drawings on practical completion date which was not adhered to. The contract however did not specify who was to prepare the as built drawings. The as-built drawings were not available on file.	Poor contract formulation.	Lack of as-built drawings may hinder economic and effective future maintenance interventions.	The Special Conditions of Contract need to clearly indicate the need for as-built drawings and specify the person in charge of their production.	
Management Response These documents got lost and the police report is attached for audit consideration Auditor’s Remarks According to the police report, only payment vouchers were stolen.				
(iii) Percentage of DLP progress / monitoring reports According to the contract DLP was 180 days. At the time of the audit, it was observed that no inspections had been carried out and there were no DLP monitoring report on file.	Poor project management	There may be a missed opportunity to identify developing defects and rectifying them at the earliest.	The Municipality should ensure that DLP inspections are conducted, snag lists updated, and reports made on its future projects.	
Management Response These documents got lost and the police report is attached for audit consideration. Auditor’s Remarks The availed police report only shows loss of two payment vouchers.				
(iv) Presence of Defects Liability Certificate. The contractual due date for issuing of the Defects Liability Certificate was 30/01/2020. However, it was noted that the DLP certificate had not yet been issued.	Poor project management in the project closure phase.		The municipality should ensure that works are inspected at the end of DLP to ascertain that all defects are rectified and a defects liability certificate issued.	
Management Response These documents got lost and the police report is attached for audit consideration. Auditor’s Remarks The availed police report only shows loss of two payment vouchers.				




92











3.6.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 16.00 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementation Poor project management (i) Material test results on file

Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results.

Management Response

These documents got lost and the police report is attached for audit consideration.

Auditor’s Remarks

The availed police report only shows loss of two payment vouchers.

(ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications

The Municipality should It poses a risk of use of ensure that materials to be materials that do not used in the permanent works conform to the are tested to avoid using specifications. materials that do not meet specification.

Some of the work items were checked on site by the audit team to ascertain conformance to design drawings and specifications. All the checks were ok representing 100% conformance as presented in the table below.

N/A OK OK

Equipment

In-situ Tests

/Tools

Projects Structure or Layer Tested

Auditors

Specification Comment

Result

Column Dimensions 300x300 300x300 Passed Size of Column Bars T16 T16 Passed Tape Measure Completion of Pece Spacing of Column Bars Thickness Test and Micro meter Division Office Block Cover to reinforcements Screw Gauge (DDEG) Stirrup Spacing for Columns Stair Bar sizes Spacing of Stair Reinforcements

93

120x120 120x120 Passed 40 40 Passed 270 270 Passed T12 T12 Passed 160x160 160x160 Passed











Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Slab Reinforcements T16 T16 Passed Spacing of Bars in slab

(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications

The audit team conducted in-situ testing of the various components of the works to determine the concrete compressive strength and compare with the specifications. 23 of the 29 tests conducted passed representing 79.3% conformance to specifications as shown in the table below;

Structure or Layer In-situ Tests Equipment /Tools Projects Tested

600x200 600x200 Passed

Auditors

Specification Comment

Result Concrete floor slab 19.0 20 Failed Concrete floor slab 29.0 20 Passed Concrete floor slab 28.0 20 Passed Concrete floor slab 33.0 20 Passed Concrete floor slab 25.0 20 Passed Stair Case 26.0 25 Passed Stair Case 25.0 25 Passed Stair Case 24.0 25 Failed Stair Case 30.0 25 Passed Concrete compressive Completion of Pece Stair Case 23.0 25 Failed Schmidt Hammer Division Office Block strength (DDEG) Access Ramp 23.0 20 Passed Access Ramp 28.0 20 Passed Access Ramp 18.0 20 Failed Access Ramp 27.0 20 Passed Splash Apron 32.0 20 Passed Splash Apron 25.0 20 Passed Splash Apron 24.0 20 Passed Splash Apron 22.0 20 Passed Columns 30.0 25 Passed Columns 25.0 25 Passed Columns 37.0 25 Passed

94











Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Columns 28.0 25 Passed Columns 26.0 25 Passed Ring Beam 25.0 25 Passed Ring Beam 18.0 25 Failed Ring Beam 24.0 25 Failed Ring Beam 25.5 25 Passed Ring Beam 28.0 25 Passed

(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defects

Ring Beam 27.0 25 Passed

The completed works were inspected on 16 th August, 2020 in the presence of a staff from Gulu Municipal Council Engineer’s. The following minor defects were observed;

Cracks on the ceiling

Management response

Peeling off of paint from the walls Corrections were done by the contractor and the documents got lost and the police report is attached for verification.

95











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Auditor’s Remarks Evidences in form of photos showing the corrections made should have been attached.				
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure (i) Observed functionality and usageAt the time of audit inspection, the division office block was already functioning and had been put to its intended use.	N/A	OK	OK	
(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety Environmental and Social Impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions(i)At the time of audit, the works were complete. Reports were not available regarding compliance to Environmental, social, health and safety requirements during project implementation.	Poor project management.	Degradation of the environment.	The Municipality should ensure that Environmental and Social Impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements are fully implemented during the project.	
Management Response Trees were planted by the contractor but the documents could not be avail to audit for verification as they got loss. Attached is the police report. Auditor’s Remarks Evidences in form of photos showing the planted the trees should have been attached.				
(i) of key audit recommendations(d) Assessment of the extent of O&M for completed facilities Percentage implementedNot applicable since the project had not been audited before.	N/A	N/A	N/A	
activities(ii) Evidence of planning and budgeting for O&MThe O&M plan was not availed to the audit team.			The municipality should ensure that it considers operation and maintenance activities in its planning and budgeting .	




96











Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(iii) Visual evidence of maintenance workIt was observed that manual maintenance activities such as sweeping and cleaning of the Division Office block was done. Slashing of grass around the structure was also routine.	N/A	OK	OK	




97











APPENDIX 1: PROJECT SCORE CARD

ASSESSMENT TOOL CRITERIA: GULU MUNICIPALITY 2018/2019

No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Scoring Criteria	USMID	URF	DDEG	SFG	SFG	DDEG	
					13 Roads	Badrudin + Gulu- Gulu	PECE P/S	SACRED SS	CHRIST CHURCH	PECE OFFICE	
1	To assess the unit cost of delivery of the infrastructure against works of similar nature (Economy) Max points - 30	To assess the variation in planned and executed quantities across municipalities (10 Marks)	% difference between the quantities in the Engineer's Estimates and Final Implemented quantities. (10 Marks)		5.65	7.25	9.62	N/A	0	N/A	
		To assess the variation in unit prices for works of similar nature (20 Marks)	% difference between the Engineer’s unit cost and the contracted unit cost (5 Marks) {N/A in case of URF Force Account}		0.82	3.46	5	N/A	0	N/A	
			% difference between the contracted unit (or Engineer's unit cost in case of URF Force Account) cost and the final unit cost (15 Marks) (or 20 Marks in case of URF Force Account)		15	15	11.27	N/A	0	N/A	
TOTAL ECONOMY					21.47	25.71	25.89	N/A	0	N/A	




98











2	To assess the level of implementation of the works against the agreed contract approved work programs and outputs (Efficiency) Max points - 35	To assess the progress of the works against time (10 Marks)	Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress) (10 Marks)	Physical lag ≤ 5% - 10mks; >5% - ≤ 10% -8mks; >10% - ≤ 20% -6mks; >20% - ≤ 25% - 4mks; >25% - ≤ 30% -2mk; above 30% - 0mks	0	6	10	10	0	10	
		To assess the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works (18 Marks)	Presence of detailed measurement sheets (2 Marks)	Detailed measurement sheets present – 2mks; Absent – 0mks	2	0	0	0	0	0	
			Payment above certified amounts (IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices etc.) (3 Marks)	No payment above certified amount – 3mks; Any payment above certified amount -0mks	3	3	3	3	0	3	
			% of overpayment (as a result of variance between audit values and certified works) to the certified value of the works (10 Marks)	0% overpayment - 10mks; 1% - ≤5% - 5mks; 6 - ≤10% - 2mks; above 10% - 0mks	10	0	5	5	5	0	
			Timeliness in payment of IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices etc. (3 Marks)	Payment within contractual provision – 3mks; Otherwise – 0mks	0	0	3	3	0	3	
		To Review contract Supervision and monitoring arrangements (7 Marks)	% of quality progress reports prepared (2 Marks)	100% reports – 2mks; otherwise - 0mks		0	0	0	0	0	
			Presence of Minutes of Site Meetings (2 Marks)	Minutes of site meetings present – 2mks; Absent – 0mks		2	2	2	0	0	




99











	% of approved supervising personnel on site (2 Marks)	100% personnel – 2mks; otherwise - 0mk		2	2	2	2	2	
% of approved equipment on site (1 Mark)	100% equipment – 1mk; otherwise - 0mk		1	1	1	1	1	
To Review contract Supervision and monitoring arrangements during project closure (7 Marks)	Presence of detailed certificate of completion and snag list (2 Marks)	Detailed certificate of completion present -2mks; otherwise 0mks	0						
	Presence of As-built drawings and maintenance manuals (2 marks)	As-built drawings present – 2mks; otherwise 0mks	0						
	% of quality DLP progress/monitoring reports (2 Marks)	100% reports present 2mks; otherwise 0mks	0						
	Presence of Defects Liability Certificate (1 mark)	Defects Liability Certificate present 1mk; otherwise 0mks	1						
TOTAL EFFECIENCY					16	14	26	26	8	19	
3	To assess the usage and quality of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities (effectiveness) Max points - 35	To assess the quality of works under implementation (19 Marks)	Material test results on file (3 Marks)	Material test results present – 3; Absent - 0	3	0	0	0	0	0	
			% conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications (5 Marks)	100% conformance – 5mks; 99% - ≥80% - 3mks; 79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk	N/A	5	5	5	5	5	
			% conformance of audit test results to specifications (8 Marks)	100% conformance – 8mks; 99% - ≥80% - 3mks; 79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk	N/A	1	8	3	1	1	




100











	Presence of defects from visual observations (3 Marks)	No defects observed – 3; Minor defects observed – 2; Major defects observed - 0	2	2	2	2	2	2	
To assess the utilization of the infrastructure (10 Marks)	Observed Functionality and Usage (10 Marks)	Functioning and used as intended – 10mks; below – pro-rata basing on team judgement	8	5	9	9	9	8	
To assess the fulfillment/ adequacy of implemented environmental, Health, social & safety measures (6 marks)	Evidence of implemented environmental and social/safety measures for infrastructure (6 marks)	Physical evidence of satisfactory implementation of environmental protection measures – 3mks; Otherwise 0	3	0	3	0	0	0	
		Physical evidence of satisfactory implementation of social/ safety measures -3mks, otherwise 0	3	0	3	0	0	0	
	To assess the extent of O&M for completed facilities	% of key audit recommendations implemented	Level of implementation of key audit recommendations >90%: Outstanding; >70% but <= 90%: Satisfactory; >50% but <=70%: Unsatisfactory; <=50%: Unacceptable							
		Evidence of planning and budgeting for O&M activities	O&M Plans and Budget Available: Outstanding; O&M Plans and Budget Not							




101











	Available: Unacceptable							
Visual evidence of maintenance activities	Identified Maintenance activities fully implemented: Outstanding; Identified Maintenance Activities partially implemented: Needs Improvement Identified Maintenance Activities not implemented at all: Unacceptable							
TOTAL EFFECTIVENESS					30.23	13.00	30.00	19.00	17.00	16.00	
TOTAL SCORE					67.70	52.71	81.89	64.29	25.00	50.00	




102











