THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON A SAMPLE OF SELECTED URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED BY GULU MUNICIPAL COUNCIL IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

Construction of Laroo Road (USMID)-Ongoing Rehabilitation of Amoz Obwona Road (URF)- Ongoing

FINAL REPORT











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development -

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY - IV
CHAPTER ONE - 18
  1.0 INTRODUCTION - 18
  1.1 BACKGROUND - 18
  1.2 USMID PROGRAM OBJECTIVE - 18
  1.3 AUDIT OBJECTIVE - 19
  1.4 AUDIT SCOPE - 19
  1.5 SELECTION OF PROJECTS - 19
CHAPTER TWO - 21
  2.0 AUDIT METHODOLOGY - 21
  2.1 ASSESSMENT OF ECONOMY - 21
  2.2 ASSESSMENT OF EFFICIENCY - 21
  2.3 ASSESSMENT OF EFFECTIVENESS - 22
  2.4 SCORING CRITERIA FOR ASSESSMENT TOOL - 22
  2.5 CLUSTERING OF PROJECTS FOR ECONOMY ASSESSMENT - 26
  2.6 WEIGHTING - 29
CHAPTER THREE - 30
DETAILED FINDINGS PER PROJECT 30 3.0
3.1 PROJECT TITLE: CONSTRUCTION OF THE FOLLOWING ROADS TO BITUMEN STANDARD (A TOTAL OF 9.07KM) UNDER
USMID BATCH-2: - 30
    3.1.1 Contract Details - 30
    3.1.2 Scope of Works - 31
    3.1.3 Status of works at the time of audit - 31
    3.1.4 Assessment of Economy - 34
    3.1.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 37
    3.1.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 58
  3.2 PROJECT TITLE: REHABILITATION OF AMOZ OBWONA AND ERINAYO ORYEMA ROADS - 106
    3.2.1 Contract Details - 106
    3.2.2 Scope of Works - 106
    3.2.3 Status of Works at the time of Audit - 106
    3.2.4 Assessment of Economy - 107
    3.2.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 110
    3.2.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 114
3.3 PROJECT TITLE: CONSTRUCTION OF TWO-UNIT TEACHERS HOUSE AND TWO-STANCE WATER BORNE TOILET AT OBIYA
WEST PRIMARY SCHOOL - 119
    3.3.1 Contract Details - 119
    3.3.2 Scope of Works - 119
    3.3.3 Status of works at the time of audit - 119
    3.3.4 Assessment of Economy - 120
    3.3.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 123
    3.3.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 127
  3.4 PROJECT TITLE: CONSTRUCTION OF A 5 STANCE WATER BORNE TOILET AT ST JOSEPH’S PRIMARY SCHOOL - 131
    3.4.1 Contract Details - 131
    3.4.2 Scope of Works - 131
    3.4.3 Status of works at the time of audit - 131
    3.4.4 Assessment of Economy - 132
    3.4.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 135
  3.5 PROJECT TITLE: CONSTRUCTION OF TWO-UNIT TEACHERS HOUSE AT LAYIBI CENTRAL PRIMARY SCHOOL - 142
    3.5.1 Contract Details - 142
    3.5.2 Scope of Works - 142
    3.5.3 Status of works at the time of audit - 142











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

    3.5.4 Assessment of Economy - 143
    3.5.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 145
    3.5.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 149
  3.6 PROJECT TITLE: CONSTRUCTION OF A 5 STANCE TOILET AND URINAL AT MARY IMMACULATE PRIMARY SCHOOL - 152
    3.6.1 Contract Details - 152
    3.6.2 Scope of Works - 152
    3.6.3 Status of works at the time of audit - 152
    3.6.4 Assessment of Economy - 153
    3.6.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 156
    3.6.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 160
  3.7 PROJECT TITLE: CONSTRUCTION OF A 5 STANCE WATER BORNE TOILET AT LALIYA PRIMARY SCHOOL - 164
    3.7.1 Contract Details - 164
    3.7.2 Scope of Works - 164
    3.7.3 Status of works at the time of audit - 164
    3.7.4 Assessment of Economy - 165
    3.7.5 Assessment of Efficiency - 167
    3.7.6 Assessment of Effectiveness - 170
APPENDIX 1: PROJECT SCORE CARD - 173











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

ACRONYMS

BoQs

Bills of Quantities

CBR

California Bearing Ratio

CML

Central Materials Laboratory

DCP

Dynamic Cone Penetrometer

DDEG Discretional Development Equalisation Grant DLP

Defects Liability Period

DSD

Double Surface Dressing

GCC General Conditions of Contract MLHUD Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development mm Millimetre OAG Office of Auditor General PDU Procurement and Disposal Unit SCC Special Conditions of Contract

SD Surface Dressing

SFG

Schools Facilitation Grant

URF

Uganda Road Fund.

USMID Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Program.

WB World Bank











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY BACKGROUND

Government of Uganda represented by Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) is in the final stages of securing an additional financing facility of USD 360 million from the International Development Association (IDA/World Bank) to finance Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development-Additional Financing (USMID-AF) Program. In the Initial financial year (i.e. 2018/19), USMID_AF shall be implemented in 18 municipalities in Uganda. The municipalities are Arua, Gulu, Lira, Soroti, Moroto, Tororo, Mbale, Jinja, Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal, Hoima, Entebbe , Masaka, Kitgum, Mubende, Kasese and Kamuli.

Accordingly, in the second year of the program 2019/2020, an additional 4 municipalities shall be identified and added to the program bringing the total number of USMID-AF participating municipal councils to 22. The USMID-AF program was expected to be effective by 1 st July 2018. One of the conditions of effectiveness of the program is for government to have in place complete annual performance assessment. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) requested the Auditor General to carry out a value for money audit/assessment for USMID and non USMID infrastructure projects implemented in the financial years 2016/17 and 2017/18 in the Municipalities that shall participate in the USMID-AF implementation during the financial years of 2018/2019 and 2019/2020.

The main objective of the audit was to undertake a Value for Money assessment of the delivery of urban infrastructure undertaken by the Municipal Councils participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development additional funding Program (USMID-AF). The scope of the assessment covered all USMID funded infrastructure and a selected number of non USMID financed infrastructure projects executed by the municipality and financed by Uganda Road Fund (URF) (force account) and Schools Facilities Grant (SFG) Projects in the Financial Years 2016/2017 and 2017/2018. The general approach was to audit, for each Municipality and for each Financial Year, One (1) USMID Project and Six (6) Non-USMID Projects (3 URF Projects and 3 SFG Projects).











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

For purposes of this assessment, seven (7) infrastructure projects were selected and weights attached in relation to the project costs as shown in the table below;

Project weights

S/N	Project	Funding	Amount (UGX)	Weights	
1	Construction works for Rehabilitation to Bitumen Standard of 13 roads (A total of 9.07km) under USMID Batch-2	World Bank (IDA)	42,579,553,237	97.25%	
2	Rehabilitation of Amoz Obwona and Eronayo Oryema Roads	URF	977,861,939	2.23%	
3	Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House and Two-Stance water Borne Toilet at Obiya West Primary School	SFG	83,321,770	0.19%	
4	Construction of 5 Stance Water Born Toilet at St. Joseph’s Primary School	SFG	23,319,896	0.05%	
5	Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House at Layibi Central Primary	DDEG	73,644,080	0.17%	
6	Construction of 5 Stance Toilet and Urinal at Mary Immaculate Primary School	DDEG	23,519,725	0.05%	
7	Construction of 5 Stance Flush Toilet at Laliya Primary School	DDEG	22,938,860	0.05%	
TOTAL			43,784,159,507	100%	




In addition, the audit identified some areas that require improvement in order to strengthen the institutional capacity and improve urban infrastructure delivery at the municipalities in Uganda. This report presents the results of the assessment and the summary of the findings for the Financial Year 2017/2018. Chapter 2 presents the approach and methodology used for the assessment and Chapter 3 presents the findings per project in the municipality.

RESULTS OF THE ASSESSMENT AND KEY FINDINGS

Results of the Assessment

Based on the approach used and procedures performed, the assessment of economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which the urban infrastructure was delivered by Moroto Municipal Council in the Financial Year 2017/18 yielded a weighted score of 69.98% for the seven selected projects as presented in the table below;

PROJECTS	USMID	NON USMID							
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	Weighted Score	
Weight (%)	97.25%	2.23%	0.19%	0.05%	0.17%	0.05%	0.05%		
Economy	28.4	19.06	22.75	22.76	23.14	24.07	22.74	28.16	
Efficiency	24	13	21	24	21	24	24	23.74	
Effectiveness	18	22	16.8	28	11.2	21	12	18.08	
Total	70.4	54.06	60.55	74.76	55.34	69.07	58.74	69.98	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development -

Economy Assessment

Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Weighted Score 28.16 out of 30

Economy assessment related to an assessment of the unit cost of delivery of the infrastructure against works of similar nature, quality and quantity. In this assessment, selected Unit project item costs as per Engineers Estimates were compared, followed by comparison of Unit project item costs as per signed Contracts and, finally actual Unit cost per square meter of road works/buildings across the 18 Municipalities.

During the comparison of the engineer’s estimates and contractor’s rates across the Municipalities, five key items were assessed;-

- USMID funded Projects; precast concrete class 30 barrier kerbs, Clearing and Grubbing, CRR for Road Base, Asphalt Concrete for Surfacing, white lines broken or unbroken for road marking;
- SFG and DDEG projects; roofing area, 230mm walling, reinforced concrete, roofing timber and internal plaster.
- URF force account projects; 600mm concrete culverts, gravel, aggregates, cement and

fuel

- URF contracted projects; 600mm culverts, concrete for drains, prime coat, first seal coat and gravel for sub-base. The weighted economy score of 28.16 out of 30 implies that there is a disparity in the engineer’s estimates, contractor/supplier rates and unit cost per square meter of infrastructure for USMID, SFG and URF projects across the Municipalities which requires the responsible authorities to address in the future.

Efficiency A ssessment Weighted Score 23.74 out of 35

Efficiency assessment related to the assessment of the level of implementation of the works against the agreed contract approved work programs and outputs. This involved review of; progress of the works against time, existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works and contract Supervision and monitoring arrangements. The following parameters were assessed; physical progress lag, presence of detailed measurement sheets, payment above certified amounts, percentage of over payments, timeliness in payments, percentage of quality progress reports, presence of site meeting minutes, percentage of approved supervising personnel on site and percentage of approved equipment on site. The efficiency assessment for the Gulu Municipality revealed that as per the initial work program, the USMID project was behind schedule with a physical progress lag of 22.64% (as at 18 th August 2018 cumulative progress). However, following increase of the length of Laroo Road, a time extension was granted up to 20 th November 2018 and the contractor issued a notification of completion of works on 11 th October 2018. Whereas all the SFG/DDEG projects were completed within the scheduled timelines, audit observed that the contracted URF funded project failed to achieve the initially planned completion date of 30 th June 2018 and had an initial physical progress lag of 35%.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

certified quantities with measured quantities revealed irregularities in measurements resulting in overpayments of UGX. 52,715,640 on the USMID projects. In addition, the audit noted a financial loss amounting to UGX 2,086,907,180 due to amendment of BOQ Item 42.01 for Asphalt concrete surfacing by the supervising consultant. A total of UGX. 24,236,100 was also overpaid to contractors on the non-USMID projects. The Municipality effected payments for all the non-USMID projects within the required timelines, however, payment of IPC No.4 to the USMID project contractor had been delayed by 12 days at the time of audit. The Municipality availed all the required number of detailed monthly progress reports for the USMID project However, for the non-USMID projects no detailed progress reports were prepared. It was further observed that whereas minutes of site meetings were prepared for the USMID project, meeting minutes particular to each respective non-USMID project were not prepared. For both the USMID and non-USMID projects, all the required supervising personnel had been mobilized. For the USMID project, the contractor had mobilized sufficient equipment required for timely delivery of the Project while for the contracted URF project no equipment was found on site yet concrete drainage works had not been completed. At the time of audit all SFG/DDEG projects had been completed thus no equipment was expected on site. The weighted efficiency score of 23.74 out of 35 reflects the challenges which Gulu Municipality still faces in supervision, progress monitoring, reporting, measurement and certification of executed works.

Effectiveness Assessment Weighted Score 18.08 out of 35

Effectiveness involved assessment of the usage and quality of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities. This involved the assessment of quality of works under implementation and the utilisation of infrastructure. The team assessed the following parameters; presence of material test results on file, percentage conformance of site works to design drawings and specifications, percentage of conformance of audit test results to specifications, presence of defects from visual observations and observed functionality and usage. The effectiveness assessment revealed that the Municipality undertook testing of construction materials used for the USMID project but not for non-USMID projects. On conformance to design drawings and specifications, the auditor noted few cases of non- conformance to design/ specifications on the USMID project especially in regard to road width and these were of minor nature; implying insignificant impact on the value for money. All asphalt cores revealed that the thicknesses were consistent with the design of USMID project. For non-USMID infrastructure projects minor deviations were also found especially on the sizes of doors and windows. An independent check on the quality of the infrastructure projects executed by the Municipality showed that for the USMID project, all the in-situ concrete strength of kerb stones and walkway slabs generally met the quality requirements. Laboratory tests on sampled asphalt concrete cores revealed that all the sampled asphalt concrete cores on all the 13 roads failed to meet both the gradation and Indirect Tensile Strength (ITS) requirements while the Bitumen Content of the sampled asphalt concrete cores on 12 of the 13 roads failed to meet the specified requirement as it was found to be either too high ot too low. For the URF project, CBR requirements expected for G30 material were met. In-situ











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

concrete tests could not be carried out on the SFG/DDEG structures since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes. Physical inspection of the works revealed a number of minor defects on both the USMID and non-USMID projects. Defects observed on the USMID project included among others; missing drain cover slab in isolated location, blocked drain inlets and generally silted rectangular drains arising from construction debris, Un-used road kerb materials abondoned on the walkways, manhole protruding above finished walkway level, broken access slab, damaged drainage gutter and poorly constructed joint with the access slab, ponding along road edge and drains intersecting covered rectangular drain having no provision to trap rubbish. For the URF project, erosion of vertical sides of the trench at edge of surface dressing and ponding of water in the drain trenches on both roads were noted. Minor defects such as cracks on the floor and poor screen finishes were observed on the SFG/DDEG projects. The USMID and URF infrastructure were open to traffic and functional. The SFG/DDEG projects had been completed and still in DLP awaiting commissioning. The score of 18.08 out of 35 reflects the challenges which Gulu Municipality still faces in material testing and implementing designs especially for non-USMID projects.

Key Findings per Project

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
1	Construction works for Rehabilitation to Bitumen Standard of 13 roads (A total of 9.07km) under USMID Batch-2 [42,579,553,237]	 The engineer’s estimates for Gulu Municipality were on average 8% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across the municipalities in the cluster;  The contractor’s rates were the lowest for all the items assessed across the municipalities in the cluster;  The project’s unit cost per square meter is 1.09 times higher than that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of road works in the cluster  The works were to be executed over a period of 12 months from 14 th August 2017 to 14 th August 2018. Based on the previous physical progress performance established from the July 2018 reports, the estimated physical progress at audit time was 77.36%; thus implying a physical progress lag of 22.64%.  The completion date was extended from 14 th August 2018 to 28 th October 2018. On 11 th October 2018, the contractor issued notification of completion, ahead of the official date of 28 th October 2018 implying that there was no physical progress lag in respect to the revised work schedule.  Detailed measurement sheets were prepared and attached to the payment certificates.  There were no payments above certified amounts.  An overpayment of UGX 52,715,640.00 was made to the contractor for different pay items measured.  The BOQ Item 42.01 for Asphalt concrete surfacing was amended from a single item to be paid in square metres at a rate of UGX 44,840 to two items, one in cubic metres at a rate of 896,800 and the other (bitumen) in tonnes at rate of UGX 4,335,000. The new item for bitumen at UGX 4,335,000 per tonne translates to UGX	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
24,130 per square metre. In effect, this change means that a square meter of completed Asphalt Concrete was delivered at UGX 68,970. Therefore, total asphalt quantity of (4,324.3/0.05) = 86,486m 2 , the cost escalation amounts to 24,130*86,486 = UGX 2,086,907,180 which is a possible financial lossfor the Revised BoQ All payments to the consultant were made on time however payment of IPC No.4 to the contractor had been delayed by 12 days at the time of audit on 07 th August 2018.  All expected eleven progress reports were availed to the Auditors. The audit found the quality of progress reports generally meeting expectation.  The Supervision Consultant organised site meetings and prepared minutes which were signed by the Parties and the Consultant.  All the required supervising staff were mobilized and actively The Contractor mobilised sufficient equipment required for timelyparticipating in the supervision. delivery of the Project.checks on the materials used. The project supervision team were undertaking routine quality Generally, 99/138 checks undertaken (representing 71% of the checks conducted) conformed to the design/ specifications. All asphalt cores revealed thicknesses consistent with the design.  39/90 (representing 43%) of the audit tests carried out conformed to the specifications. The gradation and Indirect Tensile Strength of samples from all the 13 roads failed to meet the specifications.  Physical inspection of works revealed a number of minor defects some of which included; blocked drain inlets, broken access slabs, protruding manholes, missing drain cover slabs at isolated sections etc  At the time of audit, all the 13 roads were still under construction but most of them in advanced stages of completion. The roads were found to be functional.  The Municipal Environmental Officer and the Consultant participated in the monitoring of compliance to the environmental/ social safeguards on the Project. However audit observed that some workers did not have adequate PPE and in addition at numerous locations, manholes/ rectangular drains were left open in isolated locations without any barricades or warnings, some on completed walkways, posing safety hazard to pedestrians	
2	Rehabilitation of Amoz Obwona and Eronayo Oryema Roads. [UGX 977,861,939]	 The engineer’s estimates for Gulu Municipality were generally on average1% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities;  The contractor’s rates for this project were on average 3% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities;  The project’s unit cost per square meter is 3.44 times higher than that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of contracted road sealing works across the 18 municipalities;	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
 The works commenced on 16 th March 2018 and were initially expected to be completed on 30 th June 2018. Records from the municipality, prepared in July showed physical progress at 65%. The physical progress at the expiry of original time of completion was therefore estimated to be over 30%.  No revised work program was prepared upon extenstion of contract completion from 30 th June 2018 to 30 th September.  The auditor observed that, for the one IPC so far prepared and paid, detailed measurement sheets were prepared for a few but not all items.  Payment records showed that the payments were consistent with The total over payment in the one IPC so far prepared and paidcertified amounts.was UGX 8,510,400.  The rate for the first seal coat for Amoz Obwona road was raised from the original 22,000 to 25,000 in the IPC but no documention to this effect was found on file.  All payments were effected by the Municipality within the scheduled timeline.  No detailed progress reports were found on file.  General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. However no project specific meetings were held.  The Municipal Engineer was appointed as the contract supervisor.  At the time of the audit, concrete dranage works were still pending however, materials and equipment for casting concrete had not been mobilised.  Material test results particular to this project were not found on file.  7/21 points (representing 33% of the points checked) conformed to the design drawings and specifications.  Results of the in-situ CBR determined at different points along the road revealed that the CBR requirements expected for G30 material were met.  Physical inspection of works revealed a few defects such as; a blocked trench on Eronayo Oryema road, erosion of vertical sides of the trench at edge of surface dressing and ponding of water in the drain trenches on both roads.  At the time of audit, the roads had just received the double surface treatment and were open to traffic.  There were no records regarding compliance to environmental and social impact mitigation requirements including health and safety.	
3	Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House and Two- Stance water Borne Toilet at Obiya West Primary School. [UGX 83,321,770]	 The engineer’s estimates were generally on average 140% higher than the lowest rates items assessed across the municipalities in the respective category.for the The contractor’s rates were generally on average 62% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across the municipalities in the respective category.  The project’s unit cost per square meter is 1.10 times higher than that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
building works of similar value across the municipalities.  The project commencement date was 12 th February 2018 and completion date was 30 th June 2018. All Works were completed on 8 th June with no physical progress lag  Detailed measurement sheets corresponding to the payment certificates were not prepared.  Payments were consistent with the certified amounts.  A total of UGX 4,691,900 equivalent to 5.6 % of the certified amount was overpaid to the contractor.  All payments to the contractor were effected within the stipulated contractual timelines.  No detailed progress reports were prepared. However, Brief supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works.  General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. However no project specific meetings were held.  The Assistant Municipal Engineer in charge of Buildings was appointed as the Project Manager.  There was no evidence that the Municipality undertook material Only one out of the four items checked conformed to the drawingstesting.and physical specifications.  In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.  Minor defects such as cracks on the floor and wide gaps between shutters and the floor at exits were observed.  At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been occupied by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.  Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file.	
4	Construction of 5 Stance Water Born Toilet St. Joseph’s Primary School. [UGX 23,319,896]at	 The engineer’s estimates were generally on average 98% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The contractor’s rates were generally on average 103% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The project’s unit cost per square meter is 1.08 times higher than that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of building works of similar value across all the municipalities.  The works commencement date was 13 th February 2018 and completion date was 30 th June 2018. All Works were completed on 13 th June with no physical progress lag	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
 Detailed measurement sheets corresponding to the payment certificates were not preepared.  Payments were consistent with the certified amounts.  A total of UGX 1,022,500 representing 4.9% of the certified amount was overpaid to the contractor..  The Municipality paid the contractor’s invoices on time as per the signed contract.  No detailed progress reports were prepared. However, Brief supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works.  General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. However, no project specific meetings were conducted.  There was no evidence that the Municipality undertook material All items of works checked conformed to the physical specificationstesting.and drawings.  In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.  The toilet had just been completed and no defects were observed  At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been put to use by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.  Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file.	
5	Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House at Layibi Central Primary. [UGX 73,644,080]	lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The contractor’s rates were on average 25% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The project’s unit cost per square meter is the lowest unit cost per square meter of building works of similar scope across all the municipalities.  The works commencement date was 13 th February 2018 and were required to achieve completion by the end of June 2018. All Works were completed on 11 th June with no physical progress lag  Detailed measurement sheets corresponding to the payment certificates were not prepared.  Payments were consistent with the certified amounts.  A total of UGX 5,432,600 representing 8.2% of the certified amounts The Municipality paid the contractor’s invoices submitted on time aswas overpaid to the contractor.per the signed contract.  No detailed progress reports were prepared. However, brief The engineer’s estimates were on average 140% higher than the	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works.  General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. However, project specific meetings were not conducted.  The Assistant Municipal Engineer in charge of Buildings was appointed as the Project Manager.  Works had been completed therefore no equipment was required..  There was no evidence that the Municipality undertook material testing as no material test results were found on file  Only one item out of the four items checked conformed to the physical specifications/drawings. Non-conformity to specifications was mainly observed on the doors and windows.  In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.  Major defects such as wide cracks on the floor which had just been repaired were observed but not properly done.  At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been occupied by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use provided the floor cracks observed are correctly rectified.  Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file.	
6	Construction of 5 Stance Toilet and Urinal at Mary Immaculate Primary School. [UGX 23,519,725]	lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The contractor’s rates were on average 91% times higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The project’s unit cost per square meter is the lowest unit cost per square meter of building works of similar scope across all the municipalities.  The works commencement date was 25 th March 2018 and were required to achieve completion by the end of June 2018. All Works were completed on 17 th May 2018 with no physical progress lag  Detailed measurement sheets corresponding to the payment certificates were not prepared.  Payments were consistent with the certified amounts.  A total of UGX 549,500 equivalent to 2.7 % of the certified amount was overpaid to the contractor.  The Municipality paid the contractor’s invoices timely as per the signed contract.  The Municipality supervised the works but no detailed progress reports were prepared. However, brief supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works. The engineer’s estimates were on average 98% higher than the	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
 Project specific meetings were not held and as such no site meeting minutes were availed  The Assistant Municipal Engineer in charge of Buildings was appointed as the Project Manager.  Works had been completed therefore no equipment was required.  There was no evidence that the Municipality undertook material testing as no material test results were found on file.  5 out of the 8 items checked conformed to the drawings/physical specifications. Non-conformity to specifications was observed on the door shutters, walkway width and urinal size.  In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.  Minor defects such as poor floor screed finishing were observed.  At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been put to use by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.  Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file. There is no recorded evidence of implementation of measures to preserve the health and safety of the workers and the community at large.	
7	Construction of 5 Stance Flush Toilet at Laliya Primary School. [UGX 22,938,860]	the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The contractor’s rates were 72% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities.  The project’s unit cost per square meter is 1.15 times higher than that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of building works of similar value across all the municipalities.  The works commencement date was 11 th February 2018 and were required to achieve completion by the end of June 2018. All Works were completed on 16 th April 2018 with no physical progress lag  Detailed measurement sheets were not prepared by the Municipality in the course of certification of the works.  Payments were consistent with the certified amounts.  A total of UGX 1,029,200 representing 5.5% of the certified amount was overpaid to the contractor.  The Municipality paid the contractor’s invoice timely as per the signed contract.  No detailed progress reports were prepared.  Project specific meetings were not held and as such no site meeting minutes were availed.  The Assistant Municipal Engineer in charge of Buildings was appointed as the Project Manager.  There was no evidence that the Municipality undertook material testing as no material test results were found on file The engineer’s estimates were 98% higher than the lowest rates for	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/N	Project/Amount	General Findings	
 4 out of the 7 items checked conformed to the physical specifications/drawings.  In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.  Minor defects such as poor floor finishing were observed.  At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been put to use by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.  Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file. Absence of detailed progress reports implies that there is no recorded evidence of implementation of measures to preserve the health and safety of the workers and the community at large.	




OVERALL AUDIT CONCLUSION

The assessment of economy, efficiency and effectiveness with which urban infrastructure was delivered by Gulu Municipal Council in the Financial Year 2017/2018 yielded a weighted score of 69.98%. The Municipality and the Supervising Consultant are generally managing the USMID project well. However, project management on non-USMID projects needs improvement in areas of progress reporting and monitoring, material testing, certification and measurement of works.

RECOMMENDATIONS

USMID Funded Infrastructure

1. The overpayment of UGX.52,715,640 should be recovered and quantity verification should always be keenly done to avoid over payments. The Municipality should consider undertaking further measurement of all work items.
2. The Accounting Officer should ensure that payment of IPCs and Fee Notes are effected timely in accordance with the signed contracts.
3. The municipality should undertake a re-evaluation of the splitting of item 42.01 for asphalt surfacing with the aim of recovering any costs additional to the original rate in the contract.
4. The Municipality should always ensure that payments to contractors are always effected within the stipulated contractual timelines so as to avoid interest claims due to delayed payments
5. The Municipality should consider undertaking further tests to assess the quality of asphalt concrete used and appropriate measures undertaken in the event quality requirements are not met. In addition, the Municipality should closely monitor the performance of the pavement and undertake appropriate action in the event of any failures.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

6. The Municipality and the Supervision Consultant should ensure that poor quality materials are rejected and not incorporated into the works. In addition, all defects identified should be rectified.
7. Measures should be put in place to ensure that the requisite health and safety standards are always implemented by the contractor in the course of execution of the works.

Non-USMID Funded Infrastructure

1. In order to address the wide disparity in the engineer’s estimates, contractor/supplier rates and unit cost per square meter of infrastructure, the responsible authorities should undertake a unit cost study to formulate standardised guidelines on preparation of cost estimates in Municipalities.
2. The municipality should always ensure that the contractors submit work programmes after contract signing within a period specified in the Special Conditions of Contract (SCC). In addition, revised work programmes should be submitted periodically as specified in the Special Conditions of Contract (SCC) or as soon as it is observed that the existing work programme has been rendered impractical to enable proper progress monitoring.
3. The Accounting officer should always ensure that works are measured during the certification process. Detailed measurement sheets for all items of work which have been approved and considered for payment should be prepared by the project manager and attached to the payment certificates.
4. All overpayments noted should be recovered.
5. The Municipality should ensure that detailed progress reports are prepared periodically, preferably on a monthly basis and filed on the contract management file. Comprehensive project completion reports should be prepared and filed. The reports should cover all project aspects including but not limited to physical and time progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions and summarised minutes of meetings.
6. The Municipality should avoid combining meetings of different contractors since some sensitive contractual matters cannot be discussed in general meetings.
7. The Accounting Officer should put in place measures to ensure that contractors are always adequately mobilized in the course of execution of works
8. The municipality should ensure that material tests are conducted for all projects to ensure conformance to quality requirements. These material test results should be kept on file, reported about in monthly progress reports and attached to payment certificates.
9. The Accounting Officer should put in place measures to ensure that works are executed as per design drawings and physical specifications so as to ensure that the completed infrastructure performs as intended.
10. All the defects observed should be rectified.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

11. Environmental and social screening should be carried out for all projects, Environmental and Social Management Plan should be prepared. Monitoring of compliance to environmental and social impact safeguards should be done. Measures to preserve the health and safety of the contractor’s workers and the community at large should be enforced by the project supervisor and should be reported about in progress reports.

John F. S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

29 th March 2019











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

CHAPTER ONE

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Article 163(3) of the 1995 Constitution of The Republic of Uganda requires the Auditor General (AG) to conduct Financial and Value for Money (VFM) Audits in respect of any project involving public funds. This mandate is further amplified by Section 21 of the National Audit Act (NAA) 2008 which gives the Auditor General powers to conduct financial and value for money audits for purposes of establishing economy, efficiency and effectiveness of any Ministry, Department or Agency (MDA), public organisation and any local government council.

Section 40 of the National Audit Act, 2008, empowers the Auditor General to engage the services of, or work in consultation with Professional or Technical Experts or Consultants whether in the public service or not, to enhance the performance of the OAG. Section III-part C (1) of the Financing Agreement for USMID Program provides for a Value for Money (VFM) audit starting with FY 2014/15 for the program activities under Disbursement Link Indicator 3 (DLI 3). In order to fulfil this condition, MLHUD requested the OAG to conduct a VFM audit on the infrastructure projects.

1.1 Background

Government of Uganda represented by Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) is in the final stages of securing an additional financing facility of USD 360 million from the International Development Association (IDA/World Bank) to finance Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development-Additional Financing (USMID-AF) Program. In the Initial financial year (i.e. 2018/19), USMID_AF shall be implemented in 18 municipalities in Uganda. The municipalities are Arua, Gulu, Lira, Soroti, Moroto, Tororo, Mbale, Jinja, Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal, Hoima, Entebbe , Masaka Kitgum, Mubende, Kasese and Kamuli.

Accordingly, in the second year of the program 2019/2020, an additional 4 municipalities shall be identified and added to the program bringing the total number of USMID-AF participating municipal councils to 22. The USMID-AF program was expected to be effective by 1st July 2018. One of the conditions of effectiveness of the program is for government to have in place complete annual performance assessment. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) requested the Auditor General to carry out a value for money audit/assessment for USMID and non USMID infrastructure projects implemented in the financial years 2016/17 and 2017/18 in the Municipalities that shall participate in the USMID-AF implementation during the financial years of 2018/2019 and 2019/2020.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development -

1.3 Audit Objective

Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

The main objective of the audit is to undertake a Value for Money assessment of the delivery of urban infrastructure undertaken by the Municipal Councils participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development additional funding Program (USMID-AF). The Specific objectives include:

1. Economy Assessment: This focused on the quantity, quality and unit cost of the infrastructure and making comparison with similar infrastructure design implemented in another municipality or sector.

2. Efficiency Assessment: This focused on the time taken to deliver a given quantity and quality of an infrastructure and included but was not be limited to: a. Evaluation of the level of implementation of works against agreed contract timelines b. Evaluation of existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works. c. Review of contract supervision and monitoring arrangements and recommend measures needed to address shortcomings in execution of the contracts.
3. Effectiveness Assessment: This focused on the extent to which the works carried out were delivered with the intended quality and meet the intended purpose and usage.

1.4 Audit Scope

The audit focused on the USMID project and a sample of other non-USMID financed projects undertaken in the FY 2017/2018 based on the work plan.

1.5 Selection of Projects

Projects were selected from the infrastructure projects undertaken by the Municipality in the financial year under review. Generally, for each municipality, the USMID funded project was selected in addition to six (6) non-USMID projects where applicable. Selection of the non-USMID projects was based on the following agreed criteria:

i.

Funding arrangements – projects were selected based on the funding arrangements of Uganda Road Fund (URF) and SFG. These funding arrangements were based on the fact they cut across all the participating municipalities. ii. Materiality – projects with higher implementation amounts were considered in preference to those with lower costs.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Table 1.5-1: Weights of Selected Projects

S/N	Project	Funding	Amount (UGX)	Weights	
1	Construction works for Rehabilitation to Bitumen Standard of 13 roads (A total of 9 . 07km) under USMID Batch-2	World Bank (IDA)	42,579,553,237	97.25%	
2	Rehabilitation of Amoz Obwona and Eronayo Oryema Roads	URF	977,861,939	2.23%	
3	Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House and Two-Stance water Borne Toilet at Obiya West Primary School	SFG	83,321,770	0.19%	
4	Construction of 5 Stance Water Born Toilet at St. Joseph’s Primary School	SFG	23,319,896	0.05%	
5	Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House at Layibi Central Primary	DDEG	73,644,080	0.17%	
6	Construction of 5 Stance Toilet and Urinal at Mary Immaculate Primary School	DDEG	23,519,725	0.05%	
7	Construction of 5 Stance Flush Toilet at Laliya Primary School	DDEG	22,938,860	0.05%	
TOTAL			43,784,159,507	100%	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

CHAPTER TWO

2.0 AUDIT METHODOLOGY

The audit was carried out in accordance with the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) Performance Auditing Standards and Value for money (VFM) Auditing guidelines prescribed in the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) VFM audit manual. The standards require that the audit is planned in a manner which ensures that an audit of high quality is carried out in an economic, efficient and effective way and in a timely manner. The audit was based on a Value for Money (VFM) assessment tool that evaluated economy, efficiency and effectiveness to ensure attainment of the specific audit objectives. This tool was developed in consultation with USMID Program Support

Team and the World Bank.

2.1 Assessment of Economy

Economy assessment related to an assessment of the unit cost of infrastructure and made comparisons with similar quantity and quality of infrastructure implemented in other municipalities. Economy assessment related to a comparison of the following parameters derived from Gulu Municipality with the lowest among the 18 Municipalities;

- Selected unit item costs as per engineer’s estimates
- Selected unit item costs as per the works contracts
- Unit cost per square meter of works. In the assessment of the unit cost per square metre for road works, Preliminary and general items, and earthworks were excluded while for buildings, only Preliminary and general items were excluded. The documents reviewed for this assessment included but were not limited to; Engineers’ estimates, works contracts, material supplies contracts, and force account planning documentation.

2.2 Assessment of Efficiency











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

progress reports prepared, availability of minutes of site meetings, comparison of approved supervising personnel with personnel involved in the supervision of the works and comparison of approved equipment with equipment found on site. The documents reviewed for this assessment included; works contracts, consultancy contracts, payment certificates, fee notes and vouchers, measurement sheets, time sheets, work programs, progress reports, minutes of site meetings, material delivery notes, material supplies contracts, force account planning documentation, among others. Field inspections and measurement of some of the executed works was undertaken and quantities of sampled works measured were compared to respective quantities certified for payment so as to assess the valuation of the works.

2.3 Assessment of Effectiveness

The assessment focused on the quality and usage of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities. The following were undertaken; i. An assessment of the quality of works under implementation; this was assessed by checking for the presence of material test results, comparing site works to the design requirements, comparing audit material test results of sampled items to specifications and visually checking for the presence of any defects on the works.

ii.

An assessment on the utilisation of the infrastructure; this involved undertaking site visits to assess the usage and functionality of the infrastructure.

iii.

An assessment of the level of compliance with the environmental and social impact safeguards. The implementation of health and safety requirements on the active sites and the report on the same was considered The documents reviewed for this assessment included; materials test results, works contracts, design reports/drawings, specifications among others. Field inspections were undertaken for each of the projects to assess the condition and functionality of the infrastructure, check for defects, carry out in-situ tests and collect samples for laboratory tests for comparison with specifications and the reported results.

2.4

Scoring Criteria for Assessment Tool

No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Criteria	
1	To assess the unit cost of delivery of the infrastructure against works of similar nature (Economy)	To assess the price differences between similar quality and quantity of works (30	Unit project item costs as per Engineer’s Estimates. (5 Marks)	Cross referenced across municipalities.	
			Unit project item costs as per signed Contracts (10	Cross referenced across municipalities.	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Criteria	
Max points – 30	Marks)	Marks)		
		Unit cost per square meter of road/building works among the municipalities (15 Marks).	Cross referenced across municipalities.	
2	To assess the level of implementation of the works against the agreed contract approved work programs and outputs (Efficiency) Max points – 35	To assess the progress of the works against time (10 Marks)	Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from initial work program and actual physical progress) (5 Marks)	Physical lag ≤ 5% - 5mks; >5% - ≤ 10% - 4mks; >10% - ≤ 20% - 3mks; >20% - ≤ 25% - 2mks; >25% - ≤ 30% - 1mk; above 30% - 0mks	
			Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress) (5 Marks)	Physical lag ≤ 5% - 5mks; >5% - ≤ 10% - 4mks; >10% - ≤ 20% - 3mks; >20% - ≤ 25% - 2mks; >25% - ≤ 30% - 1mk; above 30% - 0mks	
		To assess the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works (18 Marks)	Presence of detailed measurement sheets (2 Marks)	Detailed measurement sheets present – 2mks; Absent – 0mks	
			Payment above certified amounts (IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices etc.) (3 Marks)	No payment above certified amount – 3mks; Any payment above certified amount -0mks	
			% of overpayment (as a result of variance between audit values and certified works) to the certified value of the works (10 Marks)	0% overpayment - 10mks; >0% - ≤5% - 5mks; 6 - ≤10% - 2mks; above 10% - 0mks	
			Timeliness in payment of IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices etc. (3 Marks)	Payment within contractual provision – 3mks; Otherwise – 0mks	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Criteria	
To Review contract Supervision and monitoring arrangements (7 Marks)	% of quality progress reports prepared (2 Marks)	100% reports – 2mks; otherwise - 0mks	
	Presence of minutes of site meetings (2 Marks)	Minutes of site meetings present – 2mks; Absent – 0mks	
	% of approved supervising personnel on site (2 Marks)	100% personnel – 2mks; otherwise - 0mk	
	% of approved equipment on site (1 Mark)	100% equipment – 1mk; otherwise - 0mk	
3	To assess the usage and quality of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities (effectiveness) Max points - 35	To assess the quality of works under implementation (25 Marks)	Material test results on file (5 Marks)	Material test results present – 5; Absent - 0	
			% conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications (7 Marks)	100% conformance – 7mks; 99% - ≥80% - 3mks; 79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk	
			% conformance of audit test results to specifications (10 Marks)	100% conformance – 10mks; 99% - ≥80% - 5mks; 79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk	
			Presence of defects from visual observations (3 Marks)	No defects observed – 3; Minor defects observed – 2; Major defects observed - 0	
		To assess the utilization of the infrastructure (10 Marks)	Observed Functionality and Usage (10 Marks)	Functioning and used as intended – 10mks; below – pro-rata basing on team judgment	
		To assess the fulfillment of environmental and impact requirements, Health and Safety, Social.	Environmental and Social Impact safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions.	Presence and action on ESIA safeguards Health and Safety implementation on the Site and reported.	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Table 2.4-2: Assessment Criteria/methodology for the Economy Parameters

S/No.	Economy Parameter	Item	Assessment Criteria/ Methodology	
1	Unit project item costs as per Engineers Estimates. (5 Marks)	Item 1	5 items that are common to all USMID & Non USMID Municipal works contracts were selected. The unit cost of each of these items was obtained from the Engineers estimates. The lowest unit cost for a particular item across the Municipalities was given the maximum score of 1. The scores (Si) of the other Municipalities for that particular item were computed using the formula; 𝐒𝐢 = 𝟏 𝐱 𝐅𝐦/𝐅, in which Fm is the lowest unit cost for a particular item across the municipalities and F is the unit cost of a particular item for the Municipality under consideration. Each of the items selected was assessed separately across the Municipalities. The average unit cost was used in cases where the unit cost for a particular item varies within the same contract. The total score for this parameter for the municipality was the sum of the scores obtained for all the 5 items selected. In Municipalities where the Engineer’s Estimates for some items were not available, they were not considered, and a conversion factor was applied to the available items.	
		Item 2		
		Item 3		
		Item 4		
		Item 5		
2	Unit project item costs as per signed Contracts. (10 Marks)	Item 1	5 items that are common to all USMID & Non USMID Municipal works contracts were selected. The unit cost of each of these items was obtained from the contracts. The lowest unit cost for a particular item across the Municipalities was given the maximum score of 2. The scores (Si) of the other Municipalities for that particular item were computed using the formula; 𝐒𝐢 = 𝟐𝐱𝐅𝐦/𝐅, in which Fm is the lowest unit cost for a particular the municipalities and F is the unit cost of a particular item for the Municipality under consideration. Each of the items selected was assessed separately across the Municipalities. The average unit cost was used in cases where the unit cost for a particular item varies within the same contract. The total score for this parameter for the municipality was the sum of the scores obtained for all the 5 items selected. In Municipalities where the Signed Contract rates for some items were not available, they were not considered, and a conversion factor was applied to the available items.item across	
		Item 2		
		Item 3		
		Item 4		
		Item 5		














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

S/No.	Economy Parameter	Item	Assessment Criteria/ Methodology	
3	Unit cost per square meter of road/building works among the municipalities. (15 Marks)	Physical cost	The unit cost per square meter of infrastructure was obtained by dividing the physical cost of the works by the area of the works. The lowest unit cost per square meter across the Municipalities for a particular category infrastructure was given the maximum score of 15. The scores (S) of the other Municipalities category of infrastructure were computed using the formula; 𝐒 = 𝟏𝟓𝐱𝐅𝐦/𝐅, in which Fm is the lowest unit cost per square meter for a similar category of infrastructure across the municipalities and F is the unit cost per square meter of a similar infrastructure category for under consideration.the Municipalityfor similar	
		Area		
		Unit cost		




Table 2.4-3: Items for comparison per project category

S/N	Project Category		Items for Comparison	Units	
1	USMID PROJECTS	Item 1	Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerbs	M	
		Item 2	Clearing and Grubbing	Ha	
		Item 3	CRR for Road Base	M 3	
		Item 4	Asphalt Concrete for Surfacing	M 3	
		Item 5	White lines, broken or unbroken	M	
2	SFG	Item 1	Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	M 2	
		Item 2	Internal Plaster	M 2	
		Item 3	230mm walling	M 2	
		Item 4	Roofing Timber 100×50mm	M	
		Item 5	Reinforced Concrete	M 3	
3	URF (Force Account)	Item 1	600mm diameter concrete culverts	M	
		Item 2	Chippings	M 3	
		Item 3	Fuel	Ltr	
		Item 4	Gravel	M 3	
		Item 5	Cement	Bag	
4	URF (Contracted)	Item 1	600mm culverts	M	
		Item 2	Concrete Class for drains	M 3	
		Item 3	Prime Coat	Ltr	
		Item 4	First Seal Coat	M 2	
		Item 5	Gravel for sub-base	M 3	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Clustering of USMID funded Projects

Clustering of USMID funded projects was carried out and four (4) clusters were made. The clusters were as follows;

1. Hoima, Fort portal, Mbarara

2. Mbale, Tororo and Soroti

3. Moroto, Gulu, Arua and Lira

4. Jinja, Masaka and Entebbe.

To ensure fair assessment in respect to the unit cost of projects, a sub-cluster constituting USMID projects for construction of taxi/bus parks in Moroto, Arua, Fortportal, and Entebbe was created to specifically compare the unit cost of building construction works funded under USMID.

Clustering of SFG and DDEG Projects;

Clustering of the SFG and DDEG funded projects was done as follows;

- Projects with contract sums more than 50 million
- Projects with contract sums between 25 and 50 million
- Projects with contract sums less than 25 million The SFG and DDEG building projects were distributed as shown in following table across the 18 municipalities.

Table 2.5-1: Distribution of SFG and DDEG Projects

S/N		Contract Sum			
	Above 50M	Between 25M to 50M	Below 25M	
1.	Jinja	2	-	1	
2.	Kamuli	-	1	2	
3.	Moroto	-	1	-	
4.	Kitgum	1	1	1	
5.	Gulu	2	-	3	
6.	Arua	-	1	2	
7.	Mubende	2	1	-	
8.	Lira	1	2	-	
9.	Mbale	-	3	-	
10.	Tororo	-	-	-	
11.	Soroti	1	1	1	
12.	Entebbe	1	1	-	
13.	Hoima	-	-	1	
14.	Fort Portal	-	1	2	
15.	Kasese	-	1	1	
16.	Kabale	-	1	1	
17.	Mbarara	3	-	-	
18.	Masaka	1	1	-	




Municipality











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

- Construction of classroom blocks and public/community halls
- Construction of teachers houses, Office buildings and Markets.
- Construction of lined VIP latrines.
- Construction of water borne toilets.

Clustering of URF funded Projects;

Clustering of the URF funded projects was done as follows;

1. URF projects that were executed by force account,
2. URF projects that were executed by contractors in Soroti, Gulu and Moroto The URF projects were distributed as shown in following table across the 18 municipalities

Table 2.5-2: Distribution of URF Projects

S/ N	Municipality	Scope of Works				
		Sealing	Gravelling	Contracted	Street Lighting	
1.	Jinja	-	-	-	-	
2.	Kamuli	-	1	-	-	
3.	Moroto	-	-	1	-	
4.	Kitgum	-	3	-	-	
5.	Gulu	-	-	1	-	
6.	Arua	1	-	-	1	
7.	Mubende	-	3	-	-	
8.	Lira	-	3	-	-	
9.	Mbale	-	3	-	-	
10.	Tororo	-	3	-	-	
11.	Soroti	-	2	1	-	
12.	Entebbe	2	-	1	-	
13.	Hoima	-	5	-	-	
14.	Fort Portal	1	-	-	-	
15.	Kasese	-	3	-	-	
16.	Kabale	1	2	-	-	
17.	Mbarara	-	2	-	1	
18.	Masaka	-	-	1	-	




- UGX 15,000 and Below;
- Between UGX 15,000 to UGX 30,000;
- UGX 30,000 and above. Likewise, the contract rates for chippings were categorized as follows;











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

- UGX 150,000 and Below;
- Between UGX 150,000 to UGX 300,000;
- UGX 300,000 and above.

2.6 Weighting

Weighting of the projects was done to cater for financial risks associated with the projects giving consideration to infrastructure with a bigger monetary value. Thus the weighting was done pro-rata to the costs of the infrastructure selected for assessment, using the formula below; Wx=Px/Σ(P1,2..,N) where Wx is the weight for project x, Px is the project cost and N is the number of projects selected.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

CHAPTER THREE 3.0 DETAILED FINDINGS PER PROJECT

3.1

Project Title: Construction of the following roads to Bitumen Standard (A total of 9.07km) under USMID Batch-2:

Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km), Laroo Road (1.96km), Alex Ojara Road ( 0.68km), Tank Road (0.34km), Brother Reuben Road (0.64km), Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km), Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.27km), Nyerere Avenue (0.88km), Odida Road (0.25km), Timothy Okwera Road (0.42Km), Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km), Golf- course Road (0.45KM) and Peter Paul Opok Road (0.86km).

3.1.1 Contract Details The project details are presented in the following table.

Table 3.1-1: Contract Details

Project Reference Number	Gulu- 754/wrks/USMID/16-17/00001	
Executing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Project Manager	Gulu Municipal Council Engineer	
Design Consultant	M/S Sileshi Consult in JV with SABA Engineering P.L.C.	
Project Manager	The Municipal Engineer, Gulu Municipal Council	
Project Manager’s Representative - Supervising/Design Review Consultant	UB Consulting Engineers Ltd	
Original Supervision Consultancy Amount	UGX 694,800,000 Excl. VAT	
Revised Supervision Consultancy Amount (Addendum No.1 sighed on 10 th August 2018)	UGX 788,550,000 Excl. VAT {Additional UGX 93,750,000 i n respect of design and supervision of extension of Laroo Road by 530m length}	
Contractor	Chongqing International Construction Corporation (CICO)	
Original Contract Amount	UGX: 50,502,484,790; Incl. 18% VAT and 10% Contingencies	
Original Contract Amount	UGX: 43,499,058,548.7; Excl. 18% VAT but Incl. 10% Contingencies	
Revised Contract Amount (September 2017 Design Review)	UGX: 42,579,394,198; Excl. 18% VAT but Incl. Contingencies	
Corrected Revised Contract Amount (11 th July 2018)	UGX: 42,579,553,237; Excl. 18% VAT but Incl. Contingencies	
Works Contract Signing Date	09 th August 2017	
Commencement Date	14 th August 2017	
Original Time for Completion	Twelve (12) Months	
Original Completion Date	14 th August 2018	
Revised Time for Completion	Fourteen (14) Months	
Revised Completion Date	20 th November 2018	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Defects Liability Period (DLP)	One (1) Year	
Physical Progress reported	74.06 as at end of July 2018	
Financial Progress	65.74% (physical works) as at end of July 2018	
Time Lapse	81.65% of the Revised Time for Completion	
Amount certified to-date (Advance plus IPC Nos. 1 to 4 )	UGX 28,303,958,446	




3.1.2 Scope of Works Works on this USMID project comprises rehabilitation to Bitumen Standard of 13 roads totalling to 9.07Km; i.e., Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km), Laroo Road (1.96km), Alex Ojara Road ( 0.68km), Tank Road (0.34km), Brother Reuben Road (0.64km), Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km), Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.27km), Nyerere Avenue (0.88km), Odida Road (0.25km), Timothy Okwera Road (0.42Km), Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km), Golf-course Road (0.45KM) and Peter Paul Opok Road

(0.86km).

The original scope involved the following:

- Drainage Works;

 Earthworks;

- For some roads; Crushed Stone Subbase varying in thickness: 225mm, 300mm. For other roads; Natural Gravel Subbase varying in thickness: 100mm, 125mm,

150mm;

- Crushed Stone Base on all roads but varying in thickness: 150mm, 175mm, 200mm, 250mm, 350mm;
- For some roads; Double Surface DressingAsphalt. For other roads; 50mm Asphalt Concrete Surfacing;
- Ancillary Road works including street lighting, tree planting among others. The Revision in Scope following design review by the Supervision Consultant involved the following:
- The road length increased by 0.167Km to a total of 9.237Km following addition of 0.53Km on Laroo Road and slight decreases in road lengths on several roads following the design review changes;
- Subbase: 150mm thick Natural Gravel G30 for all roads;
- Base: 150mm thick Crushed Stone CRR for all roads;
- Surfacing: 50mm Asphalt Concrete Surfacing for all roads.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

1)	Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km) Entire road was at prime coat level; Cleaning in preparation for asphalt was in progress; kerbing and drainage were completed; walkways works were being finalised. Street lighting works was in progress.		
2) Laroo Road (2.49km) Entire road was at prime coat level; kerbing, drainage and walkways works were in progress.			
3) Alex Ojara Road (0.60km) Asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed.			
4) Tank Road (0.27km) Asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed.			
5) Brother Reuben Road (0.625km) Asphalt concrete, kerbing and drainage works were already completed; walkways were being finalised. Street lights were installed. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.			
6) Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km) Asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, and street light works were already completed. Walkways were being finalised. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.			














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

7)	Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.275km) Asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.		
8)	Nyerere Avenue (0.82km) Asphalt concrete, kerbing and drainage works were already completed; walkways were being finalised. Street lights were installed. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.		
9)	Asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed.Odida Road (0.24km)		
10)	Timothy Okwera Road (0.25Km) Asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.		
11)	Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km) Asphalt concrete laying and compaction was in progress for entire length; kerbing and drainage works were completed; walkways were being finalised and street lighting works was in progress. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.		














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

12)	Golf-course Road (0.45KM) Asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage and walkways were already completed. Street light works was on-going. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.		
13)	Peter Paul Opok Road (0.897km) Asphalt concrete and drainage were completed from Km 0+070 to the end; walkways were being finalised. Street lights works was on-going. Road marking and road signs works were yet to be executed. The entire walkways and drainage were untidy.		




3.1.4 Assessment of Economy

The score for economy was 28.4 out of 30 as detailed below; a) 0.+

i) Comparison of unit project item costs as per Engineer’s estimates

A review was made of the engineer’s estimates for all the USMID projects in the participating Municipalities within the cluster of Moroto, Gulu, Arua and Lira and the lowest engineer’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. Gulu engineer’s estimates were compared against lowest engineer’s rates for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.1-2: Comparison of Engineers Estimates across municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Eng. Est. Rate (F) (UGX)	Lowest rate across municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (1*Fm/F)	Percentage of Eng. Est. rate to lowest rate (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Precast concrete Class 30 kerbs	M	55,914	54,285	0.97	103%	
Asphalt Concrete for Surfacing	M 3	659,200	659,200	1.00	100%	
Clearing and Grubbing	Ha	9,840,996	9,554,365	0.97	103%	
White lines, broken or unbroken	M	8,999	8,737	0.97	103%	
CRR for Road Base	M 3	153,585	117,040	0.76	131%	
Total				4.67	Average = 108%	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

The Municipality scored 4.67 out of 5. The engineer’s estimate rates for the 5 items were on average 8% higher than the lowest for the 5 items assessed across municipalities.

Management response

It is crucial to establish the origin of the lowest rate being used. In some cases, it is obvious the reference rate is either too old or was never realistically developed. For example, CRR at 117,040 needs to be assessed considering that overall, a ton of CRR costs min 50,000 in commercial quarries. A compacted m 3 requires almost 1.7tons, transport, equipment personnel etc all of which cannot fit within the 117,040 rate.

Audit Comment

This is noted. The Government ought to develop unit rates data bases for guiding its entities.

ii) Comparison of unit project item costs as per Works contracts

A review was made of the contractors’ rates for all the USMID projects in the participating municipalities within the cluster of Moroto, Gulu, Arua and Lira and the lowest contractor’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu contractor’s rates was made against the lowest among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in table the table below;

Table 3.1-3: Comparison of Contractor’s Rates across municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Contract Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate across municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm/F)	Percentage of Contract rate to lowest rate (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Precast concrete Class 30 kerbs	M	51,200	51,200	2.00	100%	
Asphalt Concrete for Surfacing	M 3	896,800	896,800	2.00	100%	
Clearing and Grubbing	Ha	4,788,000	4,788,000	2.00	100%	
White lines, broken or unbroken	M	11,970	11,970	2.00	100%	
CRR for Road Base	M 3	159,600	159,600	2.00	100%	
Total				10.00	Average = 100%	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

iii) Comparison of Unit Cost Per Square Meter of Works

A review was made of the unit cost per square metre of infrastructure for all the USMID projects in the participating municipalities in the cluster and the lowest unit cost per square metre was identified. A comparison of the project unit cost per square meter was made against the lowest exclusive of earthworks among the participating municipalities in the cluster. The results of the assessment are presented in table below;

Table 3.1-4: Comparison of Project Unit Costs across Municipalities

Cost Per Square Meter of Road (F) (UGX)	Lowest Cost Per Square Meter of Road Among Municipalities (Fm) (UGX)	Score (15*Fm/F)	Proportion of the Project Unit Cost to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)	
Earth Works Excl.	Earth Works Excl.	Earth Works Excl.	Earth Works Excl.	
538,827	493,290	13.73	1.09	




The Municipality scored 13.73 out of 15 in comparison to lowest cost per square metre of road works excluding earth works. The project’s unit cost per square meter is therefore 1.09 times that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of road works.

Management Response

The municipalities in cluster-1 had same rates. Maybe the difference was brought about by Moroto but Moroto did not have a road under this batch. This comparison needs to be broken further to actually compare likes. A road say in Moroto may not have had asphalt as surfacing nor CRR as base. So it is important to ensure that the roads being compared have comparable structures and amenities.

Audit Comment

Moroto municipality was not considered in the assessment of the unit cost per square meter.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.1.5 Assessment of Efficiency

The score on efficiency was 24 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
programme(a) Assessment of progress of works against time (i) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on initial workThe works were to be executed over a period of 12 months from 14 th August 2017 to 14 th August 2018. The original work programme was not accompanied with cash flow and progress projections for the project duration. The progress report for the month of July 2018 indicates that, at 31 st July 2018 when nearly 100% progress should have been attained (expiry due on 14 th August 2018), the actual cumulative progress stood at 74.06%. Assessment of the physical progress figures reported in the July 2018 progress report reveals that at the end of July 2018, the monthly progress rate was 7.08% (increased from 66.98% to 74.06% from June to July 2018). The cumulative progress as at 18 th August 2018 can therefore be projected as 74.06 + (7.08/30)*14 = 77.36%; thus implying a physical progress lag of 22.64%. Management Response By start of July 2018, the instruction for extension of Laroo had already include works on the extension and as such it is wrong to only limit the extension. Table 3.2 of the Consultant’s July 2018 report clearly comparesComment It is in the Table 3.2 of the Consultant’s Report that the Auditor got the Consultant should have ensured that the Contractor submitted initial progress monitoring. Such information should have then been revised upon Auditors; and have not been availed with the management response.Audit	- The length of Laroo Road was further increased by 440m, from 2.05Km to 2.49Km; which culminated into extension of time of 75 calendar days (V.O. No.1)issued. The performace period to the adjusted performancephysical progress figure and cash flow granting extension of	- Since the worksreported in July when works had Vs adjusted timelines.are lagging behind the planned physical progress, its highly probable that the completion shall be delayed which in turn denies the intended beneficiaries timely use of the infrastructure and can result in escalation of project costsof 74.06% on page 27 and cumulative time. No such records	report therefore already started on the- The Municipality should put in place measures to ensure that the contractor completes works within time and in the future ensure changes in scope are matched with completion time.as at end of July 2018. The projections to enable future were availed to the	




been performance 2018 12months

quantities monthly

37











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(ii) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on revised work programme The Contractor submitted updated programmes monthly in accordance with the Contract. Following increase of the length of Laroo Road, a time extension of 75 days from 14 th August 2018 to “20 th November 2018” was granted. By the time of the audit on 07 th August 2018, the time extension approval was awaited. The Revised Programme was not yet submitted due to pending time extension approval. Management Response The Client issued the approval vide letter CR/207/1 on 9 th of August, approved timelines. Infact on 11 th October 2018, the contractor issued 2018 (see attached)With this explanation and supplementary information, it is apparent that programme.Audit Comment	N/A(See copy of letter notification of completion,there was no physical	-attached), and all works way ahead of thelag with respect	-were completed within the official date of 28 th Octoberto the revised time	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works (i) Presence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments. Review of the interim payment certificates No.1 up to No.4 showed that detailed measurement sheets were prepared and attached to the payment certificates. (ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment documents for IPCs and Fee Notes showed that there were no payments above certified amounts; as presented in Section (b)(iv) below. (iii) Quantity verifications The audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were compared to the	- N/A.- Inaccuracy inmeasurementsN/A	- OkOverpayment to the contractor exposes the Municipality toOk	- Ok.- The Accounting Officer should ensure that the overpayment ofOk	




2018 progress

38











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

quantities certified for payment in the latest Interim Payment Certificate No.4 to find out existence of overpayments, if any. In effect, an overpayment totalling to UGX 52,715,640 equivalent to 0.2% of the certified amount was detected by the auditor, as shown in the summary table inset below:

SUMMARY OF THE COMPUTED OVERPAYMENTS			
SER. NO.	ROAD LINK NAME	AMOUNT OF OVERPAYMENT	
1	Sir Samuel Baker Road	-	
2	Laroo Road	-	
3	Alex Ojera	17,246,376	
4	Tank Road	5,086,340	
5	Brother Reuben Road	2,344,960	
6	Hassan Mitchel road	316,700	
7	Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road	3,504,816	
8	Nyerere Road	-	
9	Odida Road	9,078,048	
10	Timothy Okwera Road	-	
11	Lasto Oketch Road	14,505,000	
12	Golf Course Road	633,400	
13	Peter Paul Opok Road	-	
TOTAL		52,715,640	




Following below are the details and comments, road-by-road, of the computed overpayments:

Management Response

financial loss UGX.52,715,640 is recovered from the contractor

The works were ongoing and generally certification of works in progress always has minor deviation in the proceeding certification. GCC 42.1 recognises this by referring to interim certifications as ESTIMATES. What is important however is that the small deviations are corrected in subsequent certification as required in GCC 42.6

39











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding							Cause			Implication			Recommendations			
Quantities should be checked to resolve underpaym ent Quantities should be checked to resolve underpaym entThe specifics for each road is responded to in the details below. 1: Overpayment computation on SIR SAMUEL BAKER (1.28KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 2 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, none was found to have been overpaid. In fact, some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Item No.Item DescriptionLocation UnitMeasured QtyCertified QtyDifference (Certified- Audit)Rate RemarksAmount of Overpay ment 1) SIR SAMUEL BAKER (1.28KM)23.17(b)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_1(b)No. 1,315.00 1,197.00 -118.00 126,700 0TOTAL 0By the time of the audit, works were still on-going and as such minor differences are expected. These are normally corrected in the subsequent IPCs.Comment To be followed upResponse23.17(c )Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_1(b)No. 688.00 611.00 -77.00 158,350 0ManagementAudit																
																
																
																
																
																
																
2: Overpayment computation on LAROO ROAD (2.49KM)The Auditor conducted measurements of 2 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, none was found to have been overpaid. In fact, some items wereobserved to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.																




40











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

Item Item No. Description

2) LAROO ROAD (2.49KM)

600mm 22.03 ( c ) (i) Reinforced

Culvert

Measure Certifie Difference Amount of Uni Location d d (Certified- Rate Overpayme Remarks

t Qty Qty Audit) nt

ref. ANNEX 350,00 Quantities should be checked m 249.00 247.32 -1.68 0 3.1.5(b)(iii)_2(e) 0 to resolve overpayment

Storm Water ref. ANNEX 3,040, 22.17 ( a ) No. 28.00 18.00 -10.00 0 Manholes 3.1.5(b)(iii)_2(f) 000

Management Response

TOTAL

0

By the time of the audit, works were still on-going and as such minor differences are expected. These are normally corrected in the subsequent IPCs.

Audit Comment

To be followed up.

3 : Overpayment computation on ALEX OJERA ROAD (0.60KM)

The Auditor conducted measurements of 5 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the item that were found to have been overpaid was 23.18(a); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment computed being UGX 17,246,3756.

Item No.	Item Description	Location	Unit	Measured Qty	Certified Qty	Difference (Certified- Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpayment	Remarks	
3) ALEX OJERA ROAD (0.60KM)										
23.01(a)	Precast concrete C lass 30 barrier kerb	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_3(a)	m	611.80	539.50	-72.30	51,200	0		
23.17(b)	Precast Cover slabs without up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_3(b)	No.	590.00	593.00	3.00	126,700		OK	
23.17(c )	Cover slabs with Up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_3(b)	No.	323.00	325.00	2.00	158,350		OK	




41











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

Class 30 precast ref. ANNEX 23.18(a) concrete Access 3.1.5(b)(iii)_3(c) Slab

Asphalt concrete ref. ANNEX 42.01(a) (A/C) 3.1.5(b)(iii)_3(d)

Management Response

Quantities should be checked to No. 686.57 794.63 108.06 159,600 17,246,376 resolve overpayme nt

m3 277.94 280.13 2.19 896,800 OK

TOTAL 17,246,376

By the time of the audit, works were still on-going and as such minor differences are expected. These are normally corrected in the subsequent IPCs. We have remeasured these slabs for IPC-7 and our final quantities for acess slabs is 712.51m.

Audit Comment

To be followed up

4:

Overpayment computation on TANK ROAD (0.27KM)

The Auditor conducted measurements of 5 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the items that were found to have been overpaid were 23.17(b) and 23.18(a); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment computed being UGX 5,086,340.

Item No.	Item Description	Location	Unit	Measure d Qty	Certifie d Qty	Differenc e (Certified -Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpaymen t	Remarks	
4) TANK ROAD (0.27KM)										
23.01(a)	Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerb	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_4(a)	m	435.8	437.1	1.27	51,200		OK	
23.17(b)	Precast Cover slabs without up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_4(b)	No.	272.00	277.00	5.00	126,700	633,500	Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment	
23.17(c )	Cover slabs with Up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_4(b)	No.	150.00	151.00	1.00	158,350		OK	




42











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

Class 30 precast ref. ANNEX 23.18(a) concrete Access Slab 3.1.5(b)(iii)_4(c)

ref. ANNEX 42.01(a) Asphalt concrete (A/C) 3.1.5(b)(iii)_4(d)

Quantities should be No. 286.10 314.00 27.90 159,600 4,452,840 checked to resolve overpayment

m3 98.87 99.00 0.13 896,800 OK

Management Response

TOTAL 5,086,340

By the time of the audit, works were still on-going and as such minor differences are expected. These are normally corrected in the subsequent IPCs. We have remeasured all works for IPC-7 and our final quantities for drain covers with upstands is 274m and access slabs 289.

Audit Comment

To be followed up

5 : Overpayment computation on BROTHER REUBEN ROAD (0.625KM)

The Auditor conducted measurements of 4 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the item that was found to have been overpaid was 23.01(a); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment computed being UGX 2,344,960. Some items were also observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.

Item No.	Item Description	Location	Unit	Measur ed Qty	Certifie d Qty	Difference (Certified- Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpayme nt	Remarks	
5) BROTHER REUBEN ROAD (0.625KM)										
23.01(a)	Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerb	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_5(a)	m	1,045.30	1,091.10	45.80	51,200	2,344,960	Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment	
23.17(b)	Precast Cover slabs without up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_5(b)	No.	683.00	678.00	-5.00	126,700	0		




43











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendations Cover slabs with Up ref. ANNEX 23.17(c ) stand beam 3.1.5(b)(iii)_5(b) ref. ANNEX 42.01(a) Asphalt concrete (A/C) 3.1.5(b)(iii)_5(d)

No. 355.00 353.00 -2.00 158,350 0

m3 283.61 279.00 -4.61 0 896,800

Management Response

TOTAL 2,344,960

We have remeasured all works for IPC-7 and our final quantities for kerbs is 1058.02m.

Audit Comment

To be followed up

6: Overpayment computation on HUSSAN MITCHEL

ROAD (0.54KM)

The Auditor conducted measurements of 3 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the item that was found to have been overpaid was 23.17(c); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment computed, albeit minor, being UGX 316,700. Some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.

Item No.	Item Description	Location	Uni t	Measur ed Qty	Certifie d Qty	Difference (Certified- Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpayme nt	Remarks	
6) HUSSAN MITCHEL ROAD (0.54KM)										
23.01(a)	Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerb	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_6(a)	m	990.00	954.16	-35.84	51,200	0	Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment	
23.17(b)	Precast Cover slabs without up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_6(b)	No.	440.00	440.00	0.00	126,700	0	Ok	
23.17(c )	Cover slabs with Up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_6(b)	No.	228.00	230.00	2.00	158,350	316,700	Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment	
TOTAL								316,700		




44











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause			Implication			Recommendations			
Management Response We have remeasured all works for IPC-7 and our final quantities for drain covers with upstand is 228m.Comment To be followed up.Audit															
Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment: Overpayment computation on Dr.KENNETH ONEKALIT ROAD (0.275KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 5 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the item that was found to have been overpaid was 23.18(a); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment computed being UGX 3,504,816. Some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Item No.Item Description Location Unit7) Dr.KENNETH ONEKALIT ROAD (0.275KM)Measured QtyCertified QtyDifference (Certified- Audit)RateAmount of OverpaymentRemarks23.01(a)Precast concrete Cla ss 30 barrier kerbref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(a)m 502.40 457.96 -44.44 51,200 0723.17(b)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(b)No. 171.00 162.00 -9.00 126,700 023.17(c )Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(b)No. 91.00 87.00 -4.00 158,350 023.18(a)Class 30 precast concrete Access Slabref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(c)42.01(a)Asphalt (A/C)concrete ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(d)No. 221.74 243.70 21.96 159,600 3,504,816m3 106.88 99.00 -7.88 0 896,800Item No.Item Description Location UnitMeasured QtyCertified QtyDifference (Certified- Audit)RateAmount of OverpaymentRemarks 7) Dr.KENNETH ONEKALIT ROAD (0.275KM)23.01(a)Precast concrete Cla ss 30 barrier kerbref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(a)m 502.40 457.96 -44.44 51,200 0Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment23.17(b)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(b)No. 171.00 162.00 -9.00 126,700 0Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment23.17(c )Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(b)No. 91.00 87.00 -4.00 158,350 0Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment23.18(a)Class 30 precast concrete Access Slabref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(c)No. 221.74 243.70 21.96 159,600 3,504,816Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment42.01(a)Asphalt (A/C)concrete ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(d)m3 106.88 99.00 -7.88 896,8000															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															




Item No.	Item Description	Location	Unit	Measured Qty	Certified Qty	Difference (Certified- Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpayment		Remarks	
7) Dr.KENNETH ONEKALIT ROAD (0.275KM)											
23.01(a)	Precast concrete Cla ss 30 barrier kerb	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(a)	m	502.40	457.96	-44.44	51,200	0	Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment		
23.17(b)	Precast Cover slabs without up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(b)	No.	171.00	162.00	-9.00	126,700	0	Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment		
23.17(c )	Cover slabs with Up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(b)	No.	91.00	87.00	-4.00	158,350	0	Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment		
23.18(a)	Class 30 precast concrete Access Slab	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(c)	No.	221.74	243.70	21.96	159,600	3,504,816	Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment		
42.01(a)	Asphalt(A/C)concrete	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_7(d)	m3	106.88	99.00	-7.88	896,800	0			




45











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding							Cause		Implication				Recommendations				
TOTAL											3,504,816					
Response We have remeasured all works for IPC-7 and our final quantities for access slabs is 223.5.Comment To be followed up.ManagementAudit																	
Item No.8) NYERERE AVENUE (0.82KM): Overpayment computation on NYERERE AVENUE (0.82KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 4 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, none was found to have been overpaid. Some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Item Description Location Unit Rate RemarksMeasur ed QtyCertifi ed QtyDifference (Certified- Audit)Amount of Overpay ment23.01( a)Precast concrete Clas s 30 barrier kerbref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_8(a)23.17( b)23.17( c)42.01( a)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_8(b)Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_8(b)Asphalt (A/C)concrete ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_8(d)m 1,596.50 -211.65 51,200 0.00 No. 523.00 519.00 -4.00 126,700 0.00No. 277.00 -20.00 158,350 0.001,384.8 5257.00Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve underpaymentm3 362.62 362.98 0.36 896,800 OKTOTAL 0.008																	
																	
																	
																	
																	
																	
																	
																	
																	




46











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause			Implication			Recommendations			
Management Response We have remeasured all quantities for IPC-7 and accordingly corrected.Comment To be followed upAudit															
9: Overpayment computation on ODIDA ROAD (0.24KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 5 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the item that was found to have been overpaid was 23.18(a); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment computed being UGX 9,078,048. Some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Location UnitMeasured QtyCertified QtyRateAmount of OverpaymentRemarksDifference (Certified- Audit)Item No.Item Description9) ODIDA ROAD (0.24KM)23.01(a)Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerbref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_9(a)23.17(b)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_9(b)23.17(c )Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_9(b)23.18(a)Class 30 precast concrete Access Slabref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_9 (c)42.01(a)Asphalt concrete (A/C)ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_9(d)000Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment OkQuantities should be checked to resolve overpaymentm 398.30 383.49 -14.81 51,200No. 251.00 240.00 -11.00 126,700 No. 138.00 137.00 -1.00 158,350 No. 298.24 355.12 56.88 159,600 9,078,048 m3 102.78 99.27 -3.51 896,800TOTAL 9,078,048															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															




47











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause			Implication			Recommendations			
Management Response All quantities were remeasured and corrected. The particular item 23.18a access slabs was corrected for IPC-6 and has been reconfirmed for IPC-7 as 290.Comment To be followed upAudit															
10: Overpayment computation on TIMOTHY OKWERA ROAD (0.25KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 5 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, none of the items was found to have been overpaid. In fact, some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Un itMeasur ed QtyCertifi ed QtyDifference (Certified- Audit)Amount of Overpaym entRate RemarksItem No.Item Description Location23.01(a)23.17(b)10) TIMOTHY OKWERA ROAD (0.25KM) Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerb Precast Cover slabs without up stand beam Cover slabs with Up stand beam Class 30 concrete Access Slab23.17(c )23.18(a)precastref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10(a)ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10(b)ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10(b) ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10(c) ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10(d)42.01(a) Asphalt concrete (A/C) m3 128.48 132.00TOTALResponse We have remeasured all quantities for IPC-7 and accordingly corrected.Comment To be followed up.m 482.90 477.22 -5.68 51,200 No. 259.00 257.00 -2.00 126,700No. 144.00 144.00No. 295.60 295.700.00 0.103.52158,350 159,600896,8000 0 00Ok Ok Ok OK OKManagementAudit															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															




48











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause			Implication			Recommendations		
1: Overpayment computation on LASTO OKETCH ROAD (0.50KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 3 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the items that were found to have been overpaid were 23.17(b) and 23.17(c); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment computed being UGX 14,505,000. Some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Item No.Item DescriptionLocation UnitMeasured QtyCertified QtyRateAmount of OverpaymentRemarksDifference (Certified- Audit) 11) LASTO PKETCH ROAD (0.50KM)23.01(a)Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerbref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_11(a)23.17(b)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_11(b)m 426.20 381.37 -44.83 51,200 0 No. 668.00 675.00 7.00 126,700 886,90023.17(c )Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_11(b)No. 246.00 332.00 86.00 158,350 13,618,100TOTAL 14,505,000Response We have remeasured all quantities for IPC-7 and accordingly corrected Particulary for items 23.17(b) and 23.17(c) the remeasured values are respectively 663 and 345. The big difference may be attributed to the section connecting golf course to Lasto Okech which was considered as part of Lasto Okech road in this conctract, and the Audit team may have skipped it.Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment1Management														
														
														
														
														
														
														
														




49











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause		Implication			Recommendations			
Audit Comment To be followed up.														
12: Overpayment computation on GOLF COURSE ROAD (0.45KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 4 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, the item that was found to have been overpaid is 23.17(b); as shown in the table below; the total amount of overpayment, albeit minor, computed being UGX 633,400. Some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Item No.Item DescriptionLocation UnitMeasured QtyCertified QtyRateAmount of OverpaymentRemarksDifference (Certified- Audit) 12) GOLF COURSE ROAD (0.45KM)23.01(a)Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerbref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(a)23.17(b)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(b)m 841.60 835.56 -6.04 51,200 0No. 555.00 553.00 -2.00 126,700 023.17(c )Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(b)No. 277.00 281.00 4.00 158,350 633,40042.01(a)Asphalt concrete (A/C)ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(d) TOTALm3 190.69 189.00 -1.69 896,800 0633,400OkQuantities should be checked to resolve underpayme nt Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayme nt Quantities should be checked to resolve overpaymentItem No.Item DescriptionLocation UnitMeasured QtyCertified QtyDifference (Certified- Audit)RateAmount of OverpaymentRemarks 12) GOLF COURSE ROAD (0.45KM)23.01(a)Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerbref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(a)m 841.60 835.56 -6.04 51,200 0Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayme nt23.17(b)Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(b)No. 555.00 553.00 -2.00 126,700 0Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayme nt23.17(c )Cover slabs with Up stand beamref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(b)No. 277.00 281.00 4.00 158,350 633,400Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment42.01(a)Asphalt concrete (A/C)ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(d)m3 190.69 189.00 -1.69 896,800 0 OkTOTAL 633,400														
														
														
														
														
														
														
														




Item No.	Item Description	Location	Unit	Measured Qty	Certified Qty	Difference (Certified- Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpayment	Remarks	
12) GOLF COURSE ROAD (0.45KM)										
23.01(a)	Precast concrete Class 30 barrier kerb	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(a)	m	841.60	835.56	-6.04	51,200	0	Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayme nt	
23.17(b)	Precast Cover slabs without up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(b)	No.	555.00	553.00	-2.00	126,700	0	Quantities should be checked to resolve underpayme nt	
23.17(c )	Cover slabs with Up stand beam	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(b)	No.	277.00	281.00	4.00	158,350	633,400	Quantities should be checked to resolve overpayment	
42.01(a)	Asphalt concrete (A/C)	ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_12(d)	m3	190.69	189.00	-1.69	896,800	0	Ok	
TOTAL								633,400		




50











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding							Cause			Implication			Recommendations		
Management Response We have remeasured all quantities for IPC-7 and accordingly corrected Particulary for item 23.17(c) the remeasured value is 278.Comment To be followed up.Audit															
13: Overpayment computation on PETER PAUL OPOK ROAD (0.897KM) The Auditor conducted measurements of 4 BoQ Items. Of these items checked, none of the items was found to have been overpaid; as shown in the table inset below. In fact, some items were observed to have been underpaid; as shown in the table inset below; which requires re-checking and resolving through subsequent IPCs.Item No.Item DescriptionLocation UnitMeasured QtyCertifie d QtyDifferenc e (Certified -Audit)Amount of Overpay mentRate Remarks13) PETER PAUL OPOK ROAD (0.897KM) 23.01(a) 23.17(b)23.17(c )Precast concrete C lass 30 barrier kerb Precast Cover slabs without up stand beamCover slabs with Up stand beam42.01(a)Asphalt (A/C)concreteResponseref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10( a) ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10( b) ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10( b) ref. ANNEX 3.1.5(b)(iii)_10( d)m 1,432.80 1,352.29 -80.51 51,200 No. 683.00 682.00 -1.00 126,700 Ok No. 353.00 348.00 -5.00 158,350m3 348.37 346.50 -1.87 896,800 OkQuantities should be checked to resolve underpaymentQuantities should be checked to resolve underpayment0 0 0 0 We have remeasured all quantities for IPC-7 and accordingly corrected.Comment To be followed up.ManagementAudit															
															
															
															
															
															
															
															
(iv) Timeliness in Payments Following in the table below are details of submissions,							-			- Negatively affects			The Accounting Officer should ensure that		




51











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
certification and payments of the Contractor’s Interim Payment Certificates and Consultant’s Fee Notes. Following are the auditor’s findings of review of the payment documents on file:  The Works Contract provides that the Employer shall pay Contractor’s IPC within 30 days of receipt and certification by the Project Manager;  The Contractor submitted an Advance Payment request and 4 IPCs No. 1, 2, ….., 4. The Employer paid the advance timely. Similarly, the IPCs No 1, 2 and 3 were paid timely. However, by the time of the audit on 07 th August 2018, the IPC No.4, which was submitted on 26 th June 2018, was not yet paid and had already been delayed by 12 days.  The Consultancy Contract provides that the Employer shall pay Consultant’s Invoice within 30 days of receipt of the Invoice.  Certification and payment records for Fee Note No.1 were not seen by the Auditors. Consultant’s Fee Notes No.2 and No. 3 were paid timely.  From the foregoing, the Auditor notes that NOT all payments are within the contractual provision; the Contractor’s IPC No.4 was still in delay by the time of the Audit.		Contractor’s cash flows which may negatively impact on delivery of their contractual obligations to the Municipality; to accumulation of interest on delayed payments possible disputesleadand- Could	payment of IPCs and Fee Notes are effected timely within 30 days in accordance with the signed contracts. The Government’s IFMS’s failures be addressed resolve negative impacts associated with delays in payments of providers.should to	




52











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

Table: Payments for Contractor’s IPCs

IPC No.	DATE SUBMITTED BY THE CONTRACTOR		AMOUNT SUBMITTED (UGX)	DATE CERTIFIED BY PM		AMOUNT CERTIFIED (UGX)	DATE PAID	AMOUNT PAID (UGX)	PAYMENT ABOVE CERTIFIED	Remarks	
Advance	17-Aug-17		8,699,811,710			8,699,811,710	29-Aug-17	8,699,811,710	0	Paid timely	
IPC 1	1-Dec-17		5,066,779,449	5-Dec-17		5,066,779,449	14-Dec-17	5,066,779,449	0	Paid timely	
IPC 2	23-Feb-18		6,214,619,673	2-Mar-18		6,214,619,673	13-Mar-18	6,214,619,673	0	Paid timely	
IPC 3	3-May-18		3,315,004,269	10-May-18		3,315,004,269	24-May-18	3,315,004,269	0	Paid timely	
IPC 4	26-Jun-18		5,007,743,345	29-Jun-18		5,007,743,345		5,007,743,345	0	By the time of the audit on 07th August 2018, the IPC No.4 was not yet paid and was already delayed by 12 days	
TOTAL		28,303,958,446			28,303,958,446			28,303,958,446	0		




Table: Payments for Consultant’s Fee Notes

Fee Note No.	DATE SUBMITTED BY THE CONSULTANT	AMOUNT SUBMITTE D (UGX)	PERCEN TAGE OF PAID AMOUN T	DATE CERTIFIED BY GMC	AMOUNT CERTIFIED (UGX)	DATE PAID	AMOUNT PAID (UGX)	PAYMENT ABOVE CERTIFIED	Remarks	
1	7-Sep-17	204,966,000	29.5%		204,966,000		204,966,000	0	Consultant over invoiced (included VAT). Certification and payment records not seen by the Auditor.	
2	9-Mar-18	107,694,000	15.5%	13-Mar-18	107,694,000	19-Mar- 18	107,694,000	0	Over-invoicing in Fee Note No.1 corrected in No.2. Paid timely.	
3	8-Jun-18	173,700,000	25.0%	14-Jun-18	173,700,000	14-Jun- 18	173,700,000	0	Paid timely	
		486,360,000	70.0%		486,360,000		486,360,000	0		




53











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

Management Response

I concur with Auditor.

Other issues relating to payments

 Amendment of Item 42.01 of the BoQ

- Change of BoQ

- Financial loss of This matter was not

Items by SC UGX

given due contractual Asphalt Concrete Surfacing works was contracted to be paid per during Design the following Pay Item:

Review

Item No.	Description	Unit	Rate (UGX)	
42.01	50mm, 60/70 penetration bitumen with 20mm maximum aggregate	Sq.M	44,840	




Usually, when A/Concrete is paid in Sq.M of finished layer of stated thickness, the rate per Sq.M is inclusive for furnishing the bitumen specified, save for any variation between the specified bitumen content and the actual instructed one. The Auditor did not see any record on file where the Contractor disputed this item in the original contract BoQ and the matter seems was never contested throughout the procurement process. However, during the Design Review, the Supervision Consultant split the Item 42.01 into two sub-items 42.01(a) and 42.01(b) as shown in the table inset below.

Item No.	Description	Unit	Rate (UGX)	
42.01(a)	50mm, 60/70 penetration bitumen with 20mm maximum aggregate	Cu.M	896,800	
42.01(b)	60/70 penetration grade bitumen for asphalt concrete surfacing	ton	4,335,000	




The new item for bitumen at UGX 4,335,000 per tonne translates to UGX 24,130 per Sq.M (@ 4.5% bitumen content and 2474

2,086,907,180 attention. To increase due to change of the cost of constructing Asphalt Concrete asphalt concrete Pay Items; surfacing by over UGX 2Bn, it should have been brought to specific attention of the Employer and a formal Variation Order instituted to add the new BoQ Item suggested by the SC. The Auditor noted that such cost increases were “managed” by the Consultant by “reducing the road widths” to be executed to the disadvantage of the

Employer;

savings could have been utilised to execute additional roads in the Kg/m3 A/Concrete density, typically). Municipality.

54











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
In effect, this change means that a square meter of completed Asphalt Concrete shall be delivered at UGX 44,840 + 24,130 = UGX 68,970. Therefore, for the Revised BoQ total quantity of (4,324.3/0.05) = 86,486m 2 , there will be cost escalation of 24,130*86,486 = UGX 2,086,907,180 which is a financial loss. The Contractor’s quoted price of UGX 44,840/m 2 may appear low but the Contractor could have, at the time of tender, allowed for any difference in other rates elsewhere in the Contract. Specific proof should have been sought that the Contractor’s original rate for a square meter of completed asphalt concrete in Item 42.01 was exclusive of bitumen. Management Response The Design Consultant (DC) made the BoQ item 42.01(a) dusts and aspalt. Measured in SqM. It didn’t mean bitumen was determined that bitumen in AC is measured in litres separately, practice requires. Ref: Tanzania DM, Uganda Roads design from the Contractor.2.5 prioritises specifications over drawings and BoQ. Although are very clear on how to measure asphalt works – and with the rate.design review, it was incumbent upon the Consultant to contract being bogged down by disputes, accordingly. In case of corrected accordingly as per GCC 2.5 The Consultant requested the contractor to submit breakdown of breakdown that they largely followed specifications. They actually and bridges which formed part of contract.GCCDuring	what an Asphalt there, as indicated item 42.1(b) as our Therefore, therethe BoQ indicated reasons. It wascontradicting asphalt, the BoQs weretheir rate for asphalt referenced a section	Concrete (AC) is by the DC. The design manual says no bad inclusion butasphalt in sq. metres, clear the Contractorcontract documents not aligned withwhich they submitted the Uganda’s General	The matter should be revisited.of. Aggs., Stone Review (DR) correctly as international good to avoid surprise claimsthe general specifications knew this judging fromcorrect them to avoid specifications and had to beand it was clear in their specifications for roads	




describing composed

rated

Design

and

Manual, is

technical

also

identifiy

and

of

55











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
So it was a case of missing item(bitumen) rather than splitting. Missing items cannot be regarded as savings. Otherwise, this would easily have turned into an arbitratable dispute which the contractor would have easily won.t is not true that road widths were reduced to manage price escalation as reported by the audit team. The road w i dths recommended in the design review were moslty dictated by available road space. Bitumen was never a deciding factor.in most cases (over 80% of the contract length), the road widths were increased during design review. For example Laroo, which is the longest of the batch at 2.49km, was supposed to be 11.0m total width with only 6m wide carriageway was changed to 14m total constructed with 9m carriageway. Peter Paul Opok and Alex ojera roads were supposed to be 10 and 12.5m total constructed widths respectively and were made 14m at design review. Others were 0.6km of Nyerrere changed from 10m to 14m, Golf course from 13m to 14m, Lasto okech from 10m to 14m, Odida from 10m to 14m, Okwera from 15m to 15m, Tank from 12m to 14m.IMoreover				
Audit Comment The management response is trying to hide the bitumen factor from the description of the Original Item 42.01 in the Contract. The Item, for clarity, states as follows: “42.01 ASPHALT CONCRETE SURFACING ; (a) 50mm, 60/70 penetration bitumen with 20mm maximum aggregate”. Indication in the description of this item is that bitumen is inclusive; and the fact that the Contractor did not raise any reservations at tender, contract negotitation, etc, until it was prompted by the Design Review Consultant; suggests that the Contractor could have been aware that the asphalt concrete which was supposed to be furnish per square meter was inclusive of the specified bitumen. The fact that, after being requested, the Contractor submitted a rate breakdown indicating that the original rate was excluding bitumen is obvious expectation from a contractor. The Auditor also notes misrepresentation of facts in the management response regarding changes in road widths. Data in Table 3-2 of the Design Review Report, Page 24, indicates that the widths of 6 roads out of 13 roads were slightly increased whereas as for 7 out of 14 roads, the widths were reduced, substantially for some; e.g., for Nyerere Rd and Sir Samuel Baker Rd, the widths were reduced from 21m to 14m and from 17m to 14m respectively. Also, parking lanes on 6 roads were eliminated and left on only 1 road. The width of Laroo road was never increased; the paved surface is 9m and overall width is 14m.				




56











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(c) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangementsreporting, supervision(i) Preparation of progress reports The project commenced on 18 th August 2017 and it is a contractual requirement to prepare monthly progress reports. Eleven progress reports for works execution in the months of September 2017 to July 2018 were availed to the Auditors. The audit found the quality of progress reports generally meeting expectation. The Report had comments on: Contract data, mobilisation, contractual issues, works progress, quality control, meetings/ Consultant’s activities, Occupational Health and Safety, Gender/HIV/Aids Financial matters, challenges and Recommendations. (ii) Organisation of site meetings The Supervision Consultant organised site meetings and prepared minutes which were signed by the Parties and the Consultant. (iii) Approved supervising personnel on site The Project Manager is the Municipal Engineer. Most of the duties of the Project Manager were delegated to the Supervision Consultant, UB Consulting Engineers Ltd. According to the Consultancy Contract, the Supervision Consultant was meant to have 9 staff of which 3 were fulltime on the site and the rest part-time. The full-time staff included the Clerk of Works, the Laboratory Technician and the Survey Assistant. At the time of the audit, the Works were on-going normally and the full-time supervision staff were present on the Site. The audit team also interacted with the Resident Engineer on the Site.	N/AN/A - N/A	OkOk - Ok	OkOk - Ok	




57











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
(iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of the Audit, Works were on-going normally. No equipment-related bottlenecks were found by the audit team. The progress report for July 2018 indicates that the Contractor mobilised sufficient equipment required for timely delivery of the Project. All the Equipment was reported in good working condition and are all owned by the Contractor.	N/A	Ok	Ok	




3.1.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 18 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementation (i) Material test results on file Audit review of contract management files showed that the project supervision team were undertaking routine quality checks of the materials used. Material test results included Filed Density Tests; Grading Tests for coarse aggregates; concrete tests; bitumen and asphalt concrete tests; etc. (ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications The Audit Team, in the presence of the Supervision Consultant’s personnel, conducted field visits and undertook measurements/ checks to compare with the designs/ specifications. For this purpose, road widths were measured at sufficient intervals. The findings are presented in the tables inset below; road-by-road. Comparison with asphalt concrete thicknesses from the cores taken by the lab team has also been made. It was observed that 99 out 139 (representing 71%) parameters checked conformed to the design drawings and physical specifications.	N/A N/A	OK Ok	Ok Ok	




58











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation Generally few cases of non-conformance to design/ specification were found and, besides, these were of minor nature; implying insignificant impact on the value for money. All asphalt cores revealed thicknesses consistent with the design.

1:

Design

conformance check for Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km)

For asphalt concrete surfacing, the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below. 6 of the 10 locations checked met the drawing specifications.

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specification s	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
1) SIR SAMUEL BAKER (1.28KM)							
1	Ker-Kerb road width	0+060	m	9.55	9.55	Ok	
		0+140	m	9.55	9.49	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec.	
		0+180	m	9.55	9.48	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec.	
		0+260	m	9.55	9.52	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec.	
		0+340	m	9.55	9.56	Ok	
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+060	m	9.00	9.04	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec.	
		0+140	m	9.00	9.00	Ok	
		0+180	m	9.00	9.00	Ok	
		0+260	m	9.00	9.02	Ok	
		0+340	m	9.00	9.01	Ok	




2 : Design conformance check for Laroo Road (2.49km)

The status of this road was not ready for widths checks.

59











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding							Cause		Implication	Recommendation		
3: Design conformance check for Alex Ojara Road (0.60km) With the exception of one location for asphalt concrete, the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below. All asphalt concrete cores revealed consistent asphalt thicknesses. No. Items Unit Drawings/ Conformity3) ALEX OJERA ROAD (0.68KM)Location Chainage0+100 0+200 0+300 0+400 0+500 0+100 0+2000+3000+400 0+500 0+010;RHS;C W 0+120;RHS;C LE 0+230;LHS;C W 0+340;RHS;S H 0+450;LHS;C LEm m m m m m mmm mmm mm mm mmmmKerb-Kerb road widthAsphalt Concrete WidthAsphalt Concrete Thickness1 23Specification sField checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)9.55 9.55 9.55 9.55 9.55 9.00 9.009.00 9.00 9.0050 50 50 50509.53 9.53 9.55 9.56 9.54 9.00 9.008.97 9.00 9.0050 55 50 5570Ok Ok Ok Ok Ok Ok Ok Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec. Ok OkOk Ok Ok OkOkNo. Items Location ChainageUnit Drawings/ Specification sField checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)Conformity3) ALEX OJERA ROAD (0.68KM) 1 Kerb-Kerb road width0+100 m 9.55 9.53 Ok 0+200 m 9.55 9.53 Ok 0+300 m 9.55 9.55 Ok 0+400 m 9.55 9.56 Ok 0+500 m 9.55 9.54 Ok 2 Asphalt Concrete Width0+100 m 9.00 9.00 Ok 0+200 m 9.00 9.00 Ok0+300 m 9.00 8.97Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec. 0+400 m 9.00 9.00 Ok 0+500 m 9.00 9.00 Ok 3 Asphalt Concrete Thickness0+010;RHS;C Wmm 50 50Ok0+120;RHS;C LEmm 50 55Ok0+230;LHS;C Wmm 50 50Ok0+340;RHS;S Hmm 50 55Ok0+450;LHS;C LEmm 50 70Ok												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												




No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specification s	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
3) ALEX OJERA ROAD (0.68KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+100	m	9.55	9.53	Ok	
		0+200	m	9.55	9.53	Ok	
		0+300	m	9.55	9.55	Ok	
		0+400	m	9.55	9.56	Ok	
		0+500	m	9.55	9.54	Ok	
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+100	m	9.00	9.00	Ok	
		0+200	m	9.00	9.00	Ok	
		0+300	m	9.00	8.97	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec.	
		0+400	m	9.00	9.00	Ok	
		0+500	m	9.00	9.00	Ok	
3	Asphalt Concrete Thickness	0+010;RHS;C W	mm	50	50	Ok	
		0+120;RHS;C LE	mm	50	55	Ok	
		0+230;LHS;C W	mm	50	50	Ok	
		0+340;RHS;S H	mm	50	55	Ok	
		0+450;LHS;C LE	mm	50	70	Ok	




60











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation 0+560;LHS;S mm Ok H 50 55

4 : Design conformance check for Tank Road (0.27km)

With the exception of one location for asphalt concrete, the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below. All asphalt concrete cores revealed consistent asphalt thicknesses.

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specification s	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
4) TANK ROAD (0.34KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+060	m	9.55	9.54	Ok	
		0+100	m	9.55	9.56	OK	
		0+120	m	9.55	9.55	OK	
		0+160		9.55	9.55	OK	
		0+220	m	9.55	9.55	OK	
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+060	m	9.00	8.97	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec.	
		0+100	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
		0+120	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
		0+160	m	9.00	8.98	Ok	
		0+220	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
3	Asphalt Concrete Thickness	0+020;LHS;SH	mm	50	48	OK	
		0+120;LHS;CLE	mm	50	50	Ok	
		0+230;RHS;CW	mm	50	60	Ok	




5 : Design conformance check for Brother Reuben Road (0.625km)

With the exception of three locations for total road widths and two locations of asphalt concrete widths, the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:

61











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

No. Items Location Unit Drawings/ Field checks/

Conformity

Chainage Specifications measurements

(averaged where

necessary)

5) BROTHER REUBEN ROAD (0.64KM)

1 Kerb-Kerb road width 0+100 m 9.55 9.50 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+220 m 9.55 9.55 OK 0+300 m 9.55

0+380 m 9.55

2 Asphalt 0+040 m 9.00

9.57 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 9.50 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 9.25 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Concrete Width Spec 0+100 m 9.00 9.00 OK 0+220 m 9.00 9.00 OK 0+300 m 9.00 9.02 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+380 m 9.00 9.00 OK

6 :

Design conformance check for Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km)

With the exception of two locations for total road widths the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specification s	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
6) HUSSAN MITCHEL ROAD (0.54KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+080	m	9.55	9.54	Ok	
		0+160	m	9.55	9.76	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+240	m	9.55	9.56	OK	
		0+320	m	9.55	9.56	OK	
		0+440	m	9.55	9.60	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
2	Asphalt Concrete	0+010;RHS;C	mm	50.00	70.00	Ok	




62











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Thickness W

0+120;RHS;C mm Ok LE 50.00 60.00

0+230;LHS;W mm Ok E 50.00 55.00

0+340;RHS;S mm Ok H 50.00 60.00

0+450;LHS;CL mm Ok E 50.00 55.00

7 : Design conformance check for Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.275km)

With the exception of four locations for total road widths the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
7) Dr.KENNETH ONEKALIT ROAD (0.27KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+060	m	9.55	9.55	OK	
		0+120	m	9.55	9.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+160	m	9.55	9.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+200	m	9.55	9.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+240	m	9.55	9.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+060	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
		0+060	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
		0+160	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
		0+200	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
		0+240	m	9.00	9.00	Ok	




.

63











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

8: Design conformance check for Nyerere Avenue (0.82km)

With the exception of 1 location for asphalt concrete and 3 locations for total road widths, the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:

No.	Items	Location Chainag e	Unit	Drawings/ Specification s	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
8) NYERERE AVENUE (0.88KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+080	m	9.55	9.57	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+140	m	9.55	9.72	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+280	m	9.55	9.53	Ok	
		0+440	m	9.55	9.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+780	m	9.55	9.55	OK	
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+080	m	9.00	9.02	OK	
		0+140	m	9.00	9.10	OK	
		0+280	m	9.00	8.98	Ok	
		0+440	m	9.00	9.00	OK	
		0+620	m	9.00	9.10	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	




9 : Design conformance check for Odida Road (0.24km)

All the locations checked for kerb-kerb road width and asphalt concrete width were consistent with drawings and requirements

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
9) ODIDA ROAD (0.25KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+060	m	9.55	9.56	OK	
		0+160	m	9.55	9.54	Ok	
		0+200	m	9.55	9.53	Ok	
		0+220	m	9.55	9.54	Ok	




64











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation 2 Asphalt 0+060 m 9.00 9.00 OK Concrete Width 0+160 m 9.00 9.00 OK 0+200 m 9.00 9.00 OK 0+220 m 9.00 9.00 Ok

1 0: Design conformance check for Timothy Okwera Road (0.25Km)

With the exception of four locations for total road widths the widths measurement checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specification s	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
10) TIMOTHY OKWERA ROAD (0.42KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road total width	0+040	m	11.55	11.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+070	m	11.55	11.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+082	m	11.55	11.00	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+148	m	11.55	11.00	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
2	Asphalt concrete total width	0+040	m	11.00	11.00	Ok	
		0+070	m	11.00	11.00	Ok	
		0+082	m	11.00	11.00	Ok	
		0+148	m	11.00	11.00	Ok	
3	Parking Lane	0+070	m	2.40	2.40	Ok	
		0+138	m	2.40	2.40	Ok	
		0+228	m	2.40	2.40	Ok	
4	Greening Island	0+070	m	2.40	2.40	Ok	
		0+138	m	2.40	2.40	Ok	
		0+228	m	2.40	2.40	Ok	




1 1: Design conformance check for Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km)

With the exception of 4 locations for asphalt concrete and 2 locations for total road widths, the widths and thickness measurements

65











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding							Cause		Implication	Recommendation		
checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:No. Items Location ChainageUnit Drawings/ SpecificationsField checks/ Conformity measurements (averaged where necessary) 11) LASTO PKETCH ROAD (0.50KM) Kerb-Kerb road widthAsphalt Concrete Width0+0800+160 0+240 0+3200+400 0+080 0+1600+240 0+3200+400mm m mm m mm m mAsphalt Concrete Thickness0+010;LHS;SH 0+120;LHS;CLE 0+230;RHS;CW 0+340;LHS;CW 0+450;RHS;CLEmm mm mm mm mm1 239.609.55 9.55 9.609.53 9.10 9.059.05 9.10 9.0450 65 55 55 60Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Ok Ok Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Ok Ok Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Ok Ok Ok Ok Ok9.559.55 9.55 9.559.55 9.00 9.009.00 9.00 9.0050 50 50 50 50No. Items Location ChainageUnit Drawings/ SpecificationsField checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)Conformity11) LASTO PKETCH ROAD (0.50KM) 1 Kerb-Kerb road width0+080 m 9.55 9.60 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+160 m 9.55 9.55 Ok 0+240 m 9.55 9.55 Ok 0+320 m 9.55 9.60 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+400 m 9.55 9.53 Ok 2 Asphalt Concrete Width0+080 m 9.00 9.10 Ok 0+160 m 9.00 9.05 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+240 m 9.00 9.05 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+320 m 9.00 9.10 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+400 m 9.00 9.04 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 3 Asphalt Concrete Thickness0+010;LHS;SH mm 50 50 Ok 0+120;LHS;CLE mm 50 65 Ok 0+230;RHS;CW mm 50 55 Ok 0+340;LHS;CW mm 50 55 Ok 0+450;RHS;CLE mm 50 60 Ok												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												




No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
11) LASTO PKETCH ROAD (0.50KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+080	m	9.55	9.60	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+160	m	9.55	9.55	Ok	
		0+240	m	9.55	9.55	Ok	
		0+320	m	9.55	9.60	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+400	m	9.55	9.53	Ok	
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+080	m	9.00	9.10	Ok	
		0+160	m	9.00	9.05	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+240	m	9.00	9.05	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+320	m	9.00	9.10	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+400	m	9.00	9.04	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
3	Asphalt Concrete Thickness	0+010;LHS;SH	mm	50	50	Ok	
		0+120;LHS;CLE	mm	50	65	Ok	
		0+230;RHS;CW	mm	50	55	Ok	
		0+340;LHS;CW	mm	50	55	Ok	
		0+450;RHS;CLE	mm	50	60	Ok	




66











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

12. Design conformance check for

Golf-course Road (0.45KM)

With the exception of 5 locations for asphalt concrete, the widths measurements checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
12) GOLF COURSE ROAD (0.45KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+060	m	9.55	9.56	Ok	
		0+160	m	9.55	9.55	Ok	
		0+240	m	9.55	9.54	Ok	
		0+340	m	9.55	9.57	Ok	
		0+380	m	9.55	9.50	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+060	m	9.00	9.10	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+160	m	9.00	9.10	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+240	m	9.00	9.10	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
		0+340	m	9.00	9.05	Ok	
		0+380	m	9.00	9.10	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	




1 3: Design conformance check for Peter

Paul Opok Road (0.897km) With the exception of 2 locations for asphalt concrete and 3 locations for total road widths, the widths measurements checks conducted on this road revealed consistency with the design/ specification at all locations sampled; as shown in the table inset below:

No.	Items	Location Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements (averaged where necessary)	Conformity	
13) PETER PAUL OPOK ROAD (0.86KM)							
1	Kerb-Kerb road width	0+180	m	9.55	9.55	Ok	
		0+260	m	9.55	9.58	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen.	




67











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause		Implication	Recommendation		
							Spec				
		0+340	m	9.55	9.55		Ok				
		0+420	m	9.55	9.58		Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec				
		0+500	m	9.55	9.53		Ok				
		0+580	m	9.55	9.50		Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec				
		0+660	m	9.55	9.54		Ok				
2	Asphalt Concrete Width	0+180	m	9.00	9.10		Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec				
		0+260	m	9.00	9.10		Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec				
		0+340	m	9.00	9.00		Ok				
		0+420	m	9.00	9.00		Ok				
		0+500	m	9.00	9.00		Ok				
		0+580	m	9.00	9.00		Ok				
		0+660	m	9.00	9.00		Ok				
intocoarser/finer results poor interlocking of the aggregates in the mix thus a porous pavement leading to ingress of moisture hence premature pavementattention  Use of a was not paid to some parameters of asphalt mix design.Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications The audit team carried out in-situ concrete compressive strength tests on the kerbstones and walkway slabs. Laboratory tests on asphalt were also conducted. The results are shown in the following tables for all the 13 roads. The following were noted;  Gradation; All of the asphalt core samples tested failed on gradation as they were found to be either too fine or too coarse.  Bitumen Content; Most of the tested samples failed to meet the bitumen content requirements as the bitumen content was either too high or too low  Indirect Tensile Strength; All the asphalt concrete samples from all the 13 roads failed to meet the requirements of the specifications.  In-situ concrete compressive strength of kerbstones and walkway slabs was generally conforming to specifications. Generally 39 out of 90 tests (representing 43%) conducted met theAdequate(iii)										Municipali ty should consider undertaki ng further tests to assess the quality of asphalt concrete used and appropriat e The	




68











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
required quality specificationsManagement Response The Indirect Tensile Strenghth test is a parameter we did not monitor as factors. Tests have proved that; bitumen quality, stone aggregtes,other ITS fail. It can not be explained.	it is a factor not materials and	failure;  The bitumen content may result into segregation of aggregates in the mix leading to cracking.  High bitumen content leads to bleeding  Failure of ITS shows that the pavement is susceptible to longitudinal cracking, moisture related deterioration and ruttinglowby road loading were very		in themeasures undertake n event quality requireme nts are not met  The Municipali ty should monitor the performan ce of the pavement and undertake appropriat e action in the event of any failuresthan other Why did the	




caused other

road compaction good.

69











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Audit Comment

Low ITS could be attributed to inadequate compaction, formation of micro cracks during early cooling of materials or low bitumen affinity and poor bonding of bitumen to the aggregates. A low indirect tensile strength makes the pavement susceptible to longitudinal cracking, moisture related deterioration and rutting. The performance of the pavement should be closely monitored during the defects liability period and beyond as recommended above.

1: Conformance

of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation fails to meet the tolerance requirement for the various sieves.	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed. In addition, the ITS test fails and this the durability of the asphalt layer.is likely to affect	
	28	100	100			
	20	98.7	85.5-94.5			
	14	79.2	66.5-73.5			
	10	64.9	57.0-63.0			
	5	44.9	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	30.9	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	21.6	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	16	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	11.5	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	7	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	3.6	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content (%)	5.4	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	High and Failed		
	Air Voids (%)	4.1	>3%	Passed		
	Voids in Minerals Aggregate, MA(%)	15.4	Min 14	Passed		
	Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%)	73.2	65-78	Passed		
	Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m2)	451.2	800 Min	Failed		
						




2 : Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Laroo Road (2.49km)

Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Concrete(AC20Asphalt	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed.	
	28	100	100			
	20	100	85.5-94.5			
	14	84.6	66.5-73.5			




70











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

10 62.8 57.0-63.0 In addition the ITS test

5 45.2 43.7-48.3

fails and this is likely to

2.36 34.1 34.6-37.4

affect the durability of 1.18 25.8 25.9-28.1 the asphalt layer 0.6 19.4 20.2-21.8 0.3 12.5 14.4-15.6 0.15 5.9 8.7-9.3 0.075 2.9 3.9-4.21

Bitumen Content (%) 5.7 4.4 (+or-) 0.3 High and Failed

Air Voids (%) 3.9 >3 Passed

Voids in Minerals Aggregate,VMA(%) 15.5 Min 14 Passed

Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%) 75.4 65-78 Passed

Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m2) 513.2 800 Min Failed

3 : Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Alex Ojara Road (0.60km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed. In addition the ITS test fails and this is likely to affect the durability the asphalt layerof	
	28	100	100			
	20	98.6	85.5-94.5			
	14	80.9	66.5-73.5			
	10	66.3	57.0-63.0			
	5	43.1	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	28	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	20.8	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	15.6	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	11.3	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	5.2	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	2	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content (%)	5.3	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	High and Failed		
	Air Voids (%)	4.03	>3	Passed		
	Voids in Minerals Aggregate, VMA(%)	15.3	Min 14	Passed		
	Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%)	73.8	65-78	Passed		
	Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (KN/m 2 )	562.5	800 Min	Failed		




71











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

In-situ Test Results							
Element Tested	No. of Points Tested	Age (days)	Moisture Condition	Average Value of Concrete Strength (Mpa)	Specification (Mpa)	Remarks	
Kerb stones	3 Points	"14-56"	dry	31.3	30.0	Passed	
Walkway Slab	3 Points			36.4	30.0	Passed	




4 : Design conformance check for Tank Road (0.27km)

In-situ Test Results							
Element Tested	No. of Points Tested	Age (days)	Moisture Condition	Average Value of Concrete Strength (Mpa)	Specification (Mpa)	Remarks	
Kerb stones	3 Points	"14-56"	dry	30.7	30.0	Passed	
Walkway Slab	3 Points			38.5	30.0	Passed	




5 : Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Brother Reuben Road (0.625km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed. In addition the ITS test fails and this is likely to affect the durability of the asphalt layer	
	28	100	100			
	20	99.1	85.5-94.5			
	14	82.1	66.5-73.5			
	10	66.5	57.0-63.0			
	5	45.1	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	29.8	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	20.6	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	14.9	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	9.6	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	4.9	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	1.6	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content (%)	5.3	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	High and Failed		




72











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation Air Voids (%) 4.2 >3 Passed Voids in Minerals Aggregate, VMA(%) 14.6 Min 14 Passed Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%) 70.8 65-78 Passed Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m2) 455.7 800 Min Failed

In-situ Test Results Moisture Element Tested No. of Points Tested Age (days) Conditio

n Kerb stones 3 Points "14-56" dry Walkway Slab 3 Points

Average Value of Specification Remarks Concrete Strength (Mpa) (Mpa)

34.5 30.0 Passed 30.0 30.0 Passed

6 : Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed. In addition the ITS test fails and this is likely to affect the durability of the asphalt layer	
	28	100	100			
	20	100	85.5-94.5			
	14	76.1	66.5-73.5			
	10	58.9	57.0-63.0			
	5	39.1	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	24.2	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	18.2	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	14.3	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	12.2	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	5.2	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	1.3	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content (%)	5.7	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	High and Failed		
	Air Voids (%)	3.9	>3	Passed		
	Voids in Minerals Aggregate, VMA(%)	14.6	Min 14	Passed		
	Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%)	73.2	65-78	Passed		
	Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m2)	513.2	800 Min	Failed		




73











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

7 : Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.275km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The target bitumen content of 4.7 in the Job Mix Design is high. The bitumen as extracted passed.contentITS test failed and this is likely to affect the durability of the asphalt layer.The	
	28	100	100			
	20	100	85.5-94.5			
	14	82.3	66.5-73.5			
	10	67.5	57.0-63.0			
	5	46.1	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	31.2	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	21.5	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	15.7	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	11	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	6.1	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	2.6	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content (%)	4.5	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	Passed		
	Air Voids (%)	3.9	>3	Passed		
	Voids in Minerals Aggregate, VMA(%)	15.2	Min 14	Passed		
	Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%)	74.4	65-78%	Passed		
	Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m2)	621.1	800 Min	Failed		




8 : Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Nyerere Avenue (0.82km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed.	
	28	100	100			
	20	99.5	85.5-94.5			
	14	82.9	66.5-73.5			
	10	68	57.0-63.0			




74











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation 5 44.6 43.7-48.3 2.36 28 34.6-37.4 1.18 20 25.9-28.1 0.6 14.8 20.2-21.8

In addition the ITS test 0.3 10 14.4-15.6 0.15 4.5 8.7-9.3 0.075 1.5 3.9-4.21 Bitumen Content (%) 5.4 4.4 (+or-) 0.3

failed and this is likely to affect the durability of the asphalt layer High and Failed Air Voids (%) 4.7 >3 Passed Voids in Minerals Aggregate, VMA(%) 14.9 Min 14 Passed Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%) 70.8 65-78 Passed Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m 2 ) 573 800 Min Failed

In-situ Test Results							
Element Tested	No. of Points Tested	Age (days)	Moisture Condition	Average Value of Concrete Strength (Mpa)	Specificatio n (Mpa)	Remarks	
Kerb stones	3 Points	"14-56"	dry	30.4	30.0	Passed	
Walkway Slab	3 Points			39.6	30.0	Passed	




9 : Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Odida Road (0.24km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average				
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	28	100	100	The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed.In addition the ITS test fails	
	20	100	85.5-94.5			
	14	84.9	66.5-73.5			
	10	70	57.0-63.0			
	5	46.4	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	30.7	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	20.1	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	16.6	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	10.8	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	5.9	8.7-9.3			




75











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

0.075

Bitumen Content (%) 4.8

3 3.9-4.21 and this is likely to affect the

4.4 (+or-) 0.3 Bitumen content high durability of the asphalt layer Air Voids (%) 3.3 >3 Passed

Voids in Minerals Aggregate, VMA(%) 15.6 Min 14 Passed

Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%) 78.9 65-78 Passed

Bulk Specific Gravity of Aggregates 2.613

Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m 2 ) 752.8 800 Min Failed

1 0: Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Timothy Okwera Road (0.25Km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed.isaddition the ITS test fails and this likely to affect the durability of the asphalt layerIn	
	28	100	100			
	20	97.8	85.5-94.5			
	14	80.9	66.5-73.5			
	10	65.3	57.0-63.0			
	5	43.3	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	29.6	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	22.8	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	17.5	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	12.6	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	6.6	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	2.8	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content (%)	5.2	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	High and Failed		
	Air Voids (%)	3.7	>3	Passed		
	Voids in Minerals Aggregate, VMA(%)	15.7	Min 14	Passed		
	Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%)	70.1	65-78	Passed		
	Indirect Tensile Strength, ITS (kN/m 2 )	761.6	800 Min	Failed		




76











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

11: Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Lasto Okech Road (0.50Km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed. In addition the ITS test fails and this is likely to affect the durability the asphalt layerof	
	28	100	100			
	20	99	85.5-94.5			
	14	82.3	66.5-73.5			
	10	64.5	57.0-63.0			
	5	44.9	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	29.7	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	21.9	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	16.4	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	10.9	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	4.1	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	0.9	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content (%)	5.1	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	High and Failed		
	Air Voids (%)	3.8	>3	Passed		
	Voids in Minerals Aggregate,VMA(%)	15.6	Min 14	Passed		
	Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%)	76.5	65-78	Passed		
	Indirect Tensile Strength,ITS (kN/m2)	662.6	800 Min	Failed		




In-situ Test Results							
Element Tested	No. of Points Tested	Age (days)	Moisture Condition	Average Concrete (Mpa)Value of Strength	Specification (Mpa)	Remarks	
Kerb stones	3 Points	"14-56"	dry	34.3	30.0	Passed	
Walkway Slab	3 Points			31.0	30.0	Passed	




77











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

12: Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications for Golf-course Road (0.45KM)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	targetcontentThe bitumen content of 4.7 in the Job Mix Design is high. The bitumen as extracted is high. The mix is In addition the ITS test fails and this is likely to affect the durability of the asphalt layer.likely to bleed.	
	28	100	100			
	20	98.4	85.5-94.5			
	14	77.2	66.5-73.5			
	10	60.1	57.0-63.0			
	5	42.9	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	30	34.6-37.4			
	1.18	20	25.9-28.1			
	0.6	14.5	20.2-21.8			
	0.3	10.2	14.4-15.6			
	0.15	6.1	8.7-9.3			
	0.075	2.6	3.9-4.21			
	Bitumen Content	5.4	4.4 (+or-) 0.3	High and Failed		
	Air Voids (%)	3.2	>3	Passed		
	Voids in Minerals Aggregate,VMA(%)	15.8	Min 14	Passed		
	Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%)	79.8	65-78	Passed		
	Indirect Tensile Strength,ITS (kN/m2)	456.9	800 Min	Failed		




1 3: Design conformance check for Peter Paul Opok Road (0.897km)

Laboratory Test Results						
Materials	Test	Auditors Result	Specification (Target subject to Table 4213/1)	Comment	Auditor's Remarks	
Asphalt Concrete (AC20)	Grading, Passing Sieve (mm)	Average		The gradation failed to meet the target requirement together with tolerance	The bitumen content as extracted is high. The mix is likely to bleed.addition the ITS test failed and this is likely to affect the durability of the asphalt layer.In	
	28	100	100			
	20	100	85.5-94.5			
	14	81.5	66.5-73.5			
	10	67.8	57.0-63.0			
	5	45.6	43.7-48.3			
	2.36	30.7	34.6-37.4			




78











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation 1.18 22.6 25.9-28.1 0.6 16.9 20.2-21.8 0.3 12.3 14.4-15.6 0.15 6.3 8.7-9.3 0.075 2.5 3.9-4.21 Bitumen Content (%) 5.2 4.4 (+or-) 0.3 High and Failed Air Voids (%) 4.1 >3 Passed Voids in Minerals Aggregate,VMA(%) 15.1 Min 14 Passed Voids Field with Binder, VFB (%) 73 65-78 Passed Indirect Tensile Strength,ITS (kN/m2) 533.2 800 Min Failed

In-situ Test Results							
Element Tested	No. of Points Tested	Age (days)	Moisture Condition	Average ofConcrete Strength (Mpa)Value	Specification (Mpa)	Remarks	
Kerb stones	3 Points	"14-56"	dry	29.0	30.0	Within limits, Ok	
Walkway Slab	3 Points			32.3	30.0	Passed	




(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain any defects

The auditors inspected the project roads on 10 th and 11 th August 2018 in the presence of the Supervising Consultant’s Staff. At the time of audit, all the 13 roads were still under construction but most of them in advanced stages of completion. Asphalt concrete paving was already completed on 10 roads and on-going on 1 road. Two roads had already been primed; of which one was already being cleaned for asphalt works. The following were observed, road – by - road:

1: Field observations on Sir Samuel Baker Road (1.28km)

Sir Samuel Baker Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time of the audit, the entire road was at prime coat level; cleaning in preparation for asphalt was in progress; kerbing and drainage were completed; walkways works were being finalised. Street lighting works was in progress. The road camber and kerb alignment appearance was good. The primed base surface appeared intact with no locations requiring repairs prior to asphalt concrete surfacing. The following were however observed that require attention:  Km 0.240 LHS: Damaged cement blocks (mainly with edge breaks) were being used to construct manhole

79

Poor handling of Poor quality work The construction materials Municipality during transportation and the Supervision Consultant should ensure











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
				that there is proper management and handling of construction materials to maintain their quality at delivery at site, in respect the damaged materials should be rejected and not incorporated into the works.	
Management Response All the damaged cement blocks were not used and were removed from site during cleanup. The Contarctor was instructed to increase care and handling in loading and off-loading of cement blocks to prevent their edges from getting damaged.The fact that such materials were found by the auditors being used in the works means that there was laxity in the quality control and assurance system, a reason to call for vigilance of the teams on the Project.Audit Comment					




80











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Km 0+680 RHS: Missing drain cover slab in isolated location Laxity in implementation of safety measures on the site.Safety hazard to pedestrians				The Consultant and Contractor should ensure strict adherence to work health and safety measures in respect barriers or warning tapes should be put in place to ensure safety of pedestrians until the missing covers are replaced	
Management Response The missing drain cover slab at this chainage was installed as shown in the photo below.Audit Comment Ok					




81











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Blocked drain inlets and generally silted rectangular drains arising from Construction debris Debris/ silk in construction debris covered rectangular drains				The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
Management Response All rectangular drains were cleaned by the contractor before taking-over by the employer as shown in the photo below.Comment OkAudit					




82











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
2: Field observations on Laroo Road (2.49km)					
Laroo Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the					
time of the audit, the entire road was at prime coat level; kerbing, drainage and walkways works were in progress. The following					
were observed:					
 The prime coat surface was covered in blinding aggregate. Drainage structures and road kerbing appered neatly finished and works was still ongoing at the time of the audit.					
3: Field observations on Alex Ojara Road (0.60km)					
Alex Ojara Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time of the					
audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. The road camber and kerb alignment					
appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were however observed that require attention:					
 Km 0+000 and several other locations: Un-used road kerb materials abondoned on the walkwaysLaxity in implementation of safety measures on the site.Safety hazard to pedestrians				The Consultant and Contractor should ensure site tidiness and safety at all times.	
Management Response On all roads, un-used road kerb materials were removed from walkways after completion as shown belowAudit Comment Ok					




83











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Km 0+030 RHS: Broken kerb at inlet of rectangular drain. Damaged works				Replace the damaged kerb and reinstate the drain inlet.	
Management Response All broken inlet kerbs were replaced by completion as shown below;Audit Comment Ok					
 Km 0+070 to 0+100 RHS: Debris/ soil on top of covered rectangular drain. Third Party Works (by private developer)Debris/ silt in covered rectangular drain				The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
Management Response All rectangular drains, road surfaces and walkways were thoroughly cleaned before taking-over by the Employer as shown below					




84











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
OkAudit Comment					
Laxity in implementation of safety measures on the site.Safety hazard to pedestrians Km 0+540 LHS: Missing manhole cover.				The Consultant and Contractor should ensure strict adherence to work health and safety measures in respect barriers or warning tapes should be put in place to ensure safety of pedestrians until the missing covers are replaced	
Management Response The missing manhole cover at 0+540 LHS was installed as shown below.					




85











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Audit Comment Ok					
4: Field observations on Tank Road (0.27km)					
Tank Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time of the					
audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. The road camber and kerb alignment					
appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were however observed that require attention:					
 0.115 LHS and several other places: Blocked rectangular drain inlet Debris/ silt in covered rectangular drain				The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains and all inlets are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
Management Response All the rectangular drains and all inlets were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking-over by the Employer as shown below.					




86











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Audit Comment Incorrect photograph in the management response.					
 Km 0+255 LHS: Manhole protruding above finished walkway level Construction error Safety hazard topedestrians				The Manhole should be trimmed to flush with the walkway.	
Management Response The sewer manhole can only be trimmed by its owners, NWSC to avoid damage to the sewer. Sewers are quite costly to relocate/make good and NWSC has been contacted to aid in the trimming of this manhole in a way that does not damage their sewer since this infrastructure belongs to them.Comment It is the duty of the Munucipality to guide NW&SC to ensure that the manhole is trimmedAudit					
5: Field observations on Brother Reuben Road (0.625km)					
Brother Reuben Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time					
of the audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing and drainage works were already completed; walkways were being finalised. Street lights were installed.					
The road camber and kerb alignment appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were however observed					
that require attention:					




87











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Km 0+000 LHS and generally along entire road: Debris/ soil on top of covered rectangular drains; Residual asphalt materials scattered in the road environsManagement Response The work was in progress. All asphalt materials were removed from the site at completion. All the covered rectangular drains were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to			- Poor disposal of hazardous materials; - Site untidiness	- Hazardous asphalt materials haphazardly disposed in the environment will		- The Contractor should be instructed to remove and safely dispose	
							
			to		environmental degradation; - Debris/ silt in covered rectangular drain.as shown below.		
				Response work was in progress. materials were removed from the site at completion. covered rectangular drains were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to			




lead to all residual asphalt materials;

- The Supervision Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the covered rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to taking- over by the Employer.

taking-over by the Employer

88











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Audit Comment Ok					
 Km 0+040, 0+250: Oil/ diesel spillage on asphalt concrete surface Leakages from construction equipment or private trucksDiesel/ oil spills could lead to road surface deterioration at the affected spots				The spots should be attended to immediately to get rid of the oil whenever the spillage occurs	
Management Response The oil spills were cleaned and stone dusted. However, the mechanics sometimes are quite big headed and always sneakly use roads as car repair surfaces.					
6: Field observations on Hassan Mitchel Road (0.54km)					
Hassan Mitchel Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time					
of the audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, and street light works were already completed. Walkways were being finalised. Street lights					
were installed. The road camber and kerb alignment appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were					
however observed that require attention:					
 General – entire road length: Debris/ soil on top of covered rectangular drains Site untidiness Debris/ silt in covered rectangular drain				The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly	




89











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
				cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
Work was in progress and contractor was concentrating on physical works to complete in time. However, All the covered rectangular drains were the Contractor prior to taking-over by the Employer.thoroughly cleaned byComment OkManagement ResponseAudit					
Diesel/ oil spills could lead to road surface deterioration at the affected spotsLeakages from construction equipment or private trucks Several locations – entire road length: Oil/ diesel spillage on asphalt concrete surface				The spots should be attended to immediately to get rid of the oil whenever the spillage occurs	
Management Response All obsereved spots with oil spills were coverd with stone dust to absorb the oils and after the entire road was washed.					
7: Field observations on Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road (0.275km)					
Dr. Kenneth Onekalit Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the					
time of the audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. The road camber and kerb					
alignment appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were however observed that require attention:					




90











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Km 0+230 RHS: Broken access slab. Lack of transition ramp or toe at end of slabDamage to works				The Contractor should be instructed to repair the damage and protect the slab from recurrence of such damage.	
Management Response Work was still in progress. All damaged slbas were repaired and the adjacent area filled with compacted murram to protect the slabs from getting damaged again.No verifiable evidence furnished with the management responseAudit Comment					
Defective joint will lead to deterioration of adjacent pavement Km 0+220: Damaged drainage gutter and poorly constructed joint with the Poor workmanship access slab				Correct defective work.	
Management Response gutter at chainage 0+220 LHS was reconstructed.Comment OkTheAudit					




91











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Entire road length: Debris/ soil on top of covered rectangular drains Site untidiness Debris/ silt incovered rectangulardrain				The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
Work was still in progress. All the covered rectangular drains were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to taking-over by the Employer.Comment OkManagement ResponseAudit					
8: Field observations on Nyerere Avenue (0.82km)					
Nyerere Avenue is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time of the					
audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing and drainage works were already completed; walkways were being finalised. Street lights were installed. The					
road camber and kerb alignment appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were however observed					
that require attention:					




92











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Km 0+803 LHS, 0+790 LHS: Missing manhole covers.Management Response  Km 0+742 – 0+765 LHS: Ponding along road edge.						Laxity in	Safety hazard to		The Consultant	
							implementation of safety measures on the site.	pedestrians		
						were installed		pedestrians until the missing covers are replaced	
						Comment OkConstruction errorAudit			Install	
							Water ponding on			
								the road surface could lead to early road failure in this section		
						water drains into the manhole at Km 0+770 LHS.	




and Contractor should ensure that such hazards are isolated with barriers or warning tapes to ensure safety of

All missing manhole covers

additional drain inlets to get rid of the ponding water or rectify the drain gutter to ensure that the

93











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
additional inlet was constructed at the lowest point (0+750 LHS) which drains into a cut-off drain at the edge of the walkway that moves the water to the disposal point at 0+770 LHS.Comment OkManagement Response AnAudit					
Private property walls undermined and could lead to legal suits. Km 0+480 RHS, 0+760 LHS and several other locations: Soil/ gravel heaped the against private propertiesNegligence of Contractor				The Contractor should be instructed to remove the gravel/ soil heaps and, if required, repair the affected walls.	
Comment OkManagement Response For the entire length of the road, the soil/ gravel heaped against private properties was removedAudit					




94











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Hazardous asphalt materials haphazardly disposed in the environment will lead to environmental degradation Km 0+530 RHS and several other locations: Scattered asphalt concrete residual materials in the road environs.Poor disposal of hazardous materials						The Contractor should be instructed to remove and safely dispose all residual asphalt materials.	
							
							
Comment OkManagement ResponseAll asphalt materials were removed from the site and disposed of safely.Audit							
The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer. Entire Road Length: Soil/ Debris on top of covered rectangular drains. Site untidiness Debris/ silt in covered rectangular drain							
the covered rectangular drains were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to taking-over by the Employer.Management Response All							




95











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Audit Comment Ok							
9: Field observations on Odida Road (0.24km)							
Odida Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time of the							
audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already completed. The road camber and kerb alignment							
appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were however observed that require attention:							
							
 Km 0+050 RHS: Open pit on edge of completed walkway Laxity in implementation of safety measures on the site.Safety hazard to pedestrians						The Consultant and Contractor should ensure that such hazards are isolated with barriers or warning tapes to ensure safety of pedestrians until the missing covers are replaced	
							
							
CommentOkManagement Response 0+050 RHS; Slabs for uncovered manholes were installed.Audit							




96











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding					Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
 Km 0+180 LHS, 0+110 LHS, and several other locations: Drains intersecting - Preventive measure covered rectangular drain have no provision to trap rubbish not incorporated into the works.- Rubbish could accumulate in the covered rectangular drain and cause drainage blockage								- Metal grills could have been installed in the channels to trap rubbish emanating from dwellings	
									
									
Management Response The amount of gabbage carried by surface water would block the gratings and instead flood roads. However, where it was absolutely necessary to put grattings, they were installed.No verifiable evidenceAudit Comment									
10: Field observations on Timothy Okwera Road (0.25Km)									
Timothy Okwera Road is a dual carriageway road with one lane on either side; a middle parking lane and cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and									
raised walkway on both sides. At the time of the audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage, walkways and street light works were already									
completed. The road camber and kerb alignment appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following were									
however observed that require attention:									
 Entire road length: Debris/ soil on top of covered rectangular drain. Site untidiness Debris/ silt incovered rectangulardrain								The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
									
									




97











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Comment OkManagement Response the covered rectangular drains were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to taking-over by the Employer.AllAudit					
Laxity in implementation of safety measures on the site. Km 0+120 RHS: Open manhole on walkway Safety hazard to pedestrians				The Consultant and Contractor should ensure that such hazards are isolated with barriers or warning tapes to ensure safety of pedestrians until the missing covers are replaced	
CommentOkManagement Response All missing manhole covers were installedAudit					
12: Field observations on Golf-course Road (0.45KM)					
Golf-course Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At					
the time of the audit, the asphalt concrete, kerbing, drainage and walkways were already completed. Street light works was on-					
going. The road camber and kerb alignment appearance was good. The asphalt concrete surfacing appeared intact. The following					




98











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program 

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
were however observed that require attention:							
Entire road length: Debris/ soil on top of covered rectangular drains. Site untidiness Debris/ silt incovered rectangulardrain						The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
							
							
Management Response							
Km 0+085 and several other locations: Open street light chambers. Laxity in implementation of safety measures on the site.Safety hazard to pedestrians						The Consultant and Contractor should ensure that such hazards are isolated with barriers or warning tapes to ensure safety of pedestrians until the	
							
							






99











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
						missing covers are replaced	
Management Response The open pit was a manhole for a streetlight battery. All lights and their accessories were installed and the manholes subsequently covered.Audit Comment Ok							
Km 0+413 RHS: Broken up-stand kerb for drain cover. Damaged works						Replace the damaged kerb and reinstate the drain inlet.	
							
							
Management Response Damaged slab with upstand was replaced							






100











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Audit Comment Ok							
13: Field observations on Peter Paul Opok Road (0.897km)							
Peter Paul Opok Road is a two lane single carriageway road with a cycle lane on both LHS and RHS and raised walkway on both sides. At the time							
of the audit, the asphalt concrete and drainage were completed from Km 0+070 to the end; walkways were being finalised. Street lights works							
was on-going. Drainage and road works were on-going in the segment before Km 0+070. The road camber and kerb alignment appearance was							
good. The asphalt concrete surfacing in the completed section appeared intact. The following were however observed that require attention:							
Km 0+138 LHS and several other locations: Blocked rectangular drain inlet. From construction activitiesDebris/ silt in covered rectangular drain						The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains and all inlets are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
							
							
Management Response All the covered rectangular drains were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to taking-over by the Employer.							






101











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding					Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Audit Comment Ok									
 Entire road length: Debris/ soil on top of covered rectangular drain Site untidiness Debris/ silt incovered rectangulardrain								The Consultant and the Municipality should ensure that the rectangular drains are thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor before taking- over by the Employer.	
									
									
Management Response All the covered rectangular drains were thoroughly cleaned by the Contractor prior to taking-over by the Employer.Audit Comment Ok.									
 Km 0+410 LHS: Broken kerb at drain inlet Damaged works								Replace the damaged kerb and reinstate the drain inlet.	
									




102











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Management Response Damaged kerb inlet was replacedAudit Comment Ok							
 Km 0+720 LHS and several other locations: Open street light chambers Laxity in implementation of safety measures on the site.Safety hazard to pedestrians						The Consultant and Contractor should ensure strict adherence to work health and safety measures in respect barriers or warning tapes should be put in place to ensure safety of pedestrians until the missing covers are replaced	
							
							
Management Response Works were ongoing. At completion, these manholes were covered with street lights components.							




103











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure (i) Observed functionality and usage At the time of audit, all the 13 roads were still under construction but most of them in advanced stages of completion. Asphalt concrete paving was already completed on 10 roads and on-going on 1 road. Two roads had already been primed; of which one was already being cleaned for asphalt works. All the roads which were already paved with asphalt were opened to traffic and were functioning despite lack of road furniture such as traffic signs and road marking; the volume of traffic was noted to be low and without flow constraints at all. The roads which were under construction were carrying controlled traffic flow as per the project’s traffic management plans. Obstructions were however observed on many of the roads’ walkways interrupting pedestrian movement. Some of these obstructions such as open pits without any barriers or warning tapes posed safety hazard to the pedestrians.	N/A	Ok		Ok	
(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety (i) Environmental and Social impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions Social and environmental safeguards files were availed to the Auditor. The Auditor observed the following:  The Municipal Environmental Officer participated in the monitoring of compliance to the environmental/ social safeguards on the Project; The Contractor prepared an ESMP which was submitted to the Consultant on 28 th August 2017. During construction, environmental and social compliance was monitored according to this plan; The Contractor prepared and submitted a Traffic Management Plan which was reviewed by the Supervision Consultant; On the Contractor’s Team, there is an Environmental Officer, a Health and Safety Officer and a Human and Safety Assistant who are responsible for routine supervision of compliance with requirements of the approved ESMP on the Project. The Consultant’s team also has a Socio-Environmentalist on the	Safeguards in place not implemented fully on the site	Health and safety risk to the workers		The Accounting Officer should put in place measures to ensure that all the requisite health, safety measures are always implemented by the contractor in the course of execution of the works.	




104











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation		
Project to monitor performance of the Contractor in these respects. HIV/ AIDS and Gender activities are being implemented on the Project. Reports on “Occupational Health and Safety, HIV/AIDS and Gender” are being prepared monthly to this effect; The Contractor obtained requisite NEMA approvals for asphalt plant, quarry, borrow pits and campsite; copies of which were seen by the Auditor on the files; During site inspection of on-going works along Sir Samuel Baker Road, the audit team observed that some of the workers did not have adequate PPE.Left: a worker without protective shoes; Right: a worker sweeping stone dust but without nose mask. It was also further revealed during the inspection that, at numerous locations, manholes/ rectangular drains were left open in isolated locations without any barricades or warnings, some on completed walkways, posing safety hazard to pedestrians. 					




105











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support toMunicipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.2

Project Title: Rehabilitation of Amoz Obwona and Erinayo Oryema Roads

The project was implemented by Gulu Municipal Council (GMC) with funding from Uganda Road Fund. Works were executed by a contractor under supervision of the Municipal council.

3.2.1 Contract Details The project details are presented in the following table.

Table 3.2-1: Contract Details

Implementing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	URF	
Project Manager	Municipal Engineer	
Works contractor	Destiny Civil Engineering Limited	
Procurement Reference Number	GMC754/Wrks/76-18/00001	
Date of contract award	21 st February 2018	
Contract signing date	23 rd February 2018	
Planned Commencement date	1 st March 2018	
Actual commencement date	16 th March 2018	
Original contract period	4 Months	
Initial ofcompletiondate	30 th June 2018	
ReviseddateCompletion	30 th September 2018	
Planned amount	UGX 980,000,000 (As per annual work plan)	
Engineer’s estimate	UGX 1,040,639,632	
Contract amount	UGX 977,861,939	




3.2.2 Scope of Works The scope of the works included;

- Clearing and grubbing,

 Earthworks

- Gravel road base
- Double bituminous surface treatment; 14/20mm chipping in first seal and 10/14mm chipping in second seal,
- Installation of cross and access concrete pipe culverts and concrete end structures.
- Construction of concrete lined open drains and grouted stone pitching works.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support toMunicipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Newly sealed Amoz Obwona road

Newly sealed Erinayo Oryema road

3.2.4 Assessment of Economy

The score on economy was 19.06 out of 30 as detailed below; (a) Assessment of the price difference between similar quality and quantity of works

i) Comparison of unit project item costs as per Engineer’s estimates

A review was made of the engineer’s estimates for all the URF projects executed by contractors under supervision of the municipality in all the Municipalities and the lowest engineer’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu engineer’s rates was made against the lowest engineer’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.2-2: Comparison of Engineers Estimates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Eng. Est. Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (1*Fm/F)	Percentage of Eng. Est. rate to lowest rate (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
600mm culverts	M	213,333	213,333	1.00	100%	
Concrete for drains	CM	550,000	550,000	1.00	100%	
Prime Coat	Ltr	5,500	5,200	0.95	106%	
First Seal Coat	M 2	25,000	25,000	1.00	100%	
Gravel for Sub- base	M 3	15,000	15,000	1.00	100%	
Total Score				4.95	Average = 101%	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support toMunicipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

ii) Comparison of unit project item costs as per Works contracts

A review was made of contractors’ rates for all the URF projects executed by contractors under supervision of the municipality in all the Municipalities and the lowest contractor’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu contractor’s rates was made against the lowest contractor’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.2-3: Comparison of Contractor’s Rates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Contract Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm/F)	Percentage of Contract rate to lowest rate (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
600mm culverts	M	120,000	120,000	2.00	100%	
Concrete for drains	CM	150,000	150,000	2.00	100%	
Prime Coat	Ltr	5,500	4,800	1.75	115%	
First Seal Coat	M 2	22,000	22,000	2.00	100%	
Gravel for Sub- base	M 3	30,000	30,000	2.00	100%	
Total Score				9.75	Average = 103%	




The Municipality scored 9.75 out of 10. The contractor’s rates for this project were generally on average 3% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the 18 municipalities. This could be attributed to the following;

- Contractor’s pricing strategy;
- Prevailing market prices of items at the time of bidding;
- Geographical location of the municipality in comparison to proposed material sources.

Management Response

Ok.

Cost per Square Meter of Road Works (F) (UGX)	Lowest Cost per Square Meter Road Works Among Municipalities (Fm) (UGX)	Score (15*Fm/F)	Proportion of the Project Unit Cost to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)	
175,918	51,160	4.36	3.44	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support toMunicipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

The Municipality scored 4.36 out of 15. The project’s unit cost per square meter is 3.44 times higher than that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of contracted road sealing works across the 18 municipalities. This could be attributed to the quoted prices provided by the contractor.

Management response

I would like to believe that, the comparision may be unfair as specifications, made of constructions, etc are not uniform. These projects were designed and specified by the individual municipality. Expertice of the Engineers therefore defers. But the standard of our URF roads proves that we must be fairly expensive to attain higher quality than the rest.

Audit Comment

Several items were deducted from the contract sum of this project to ensure fair comparison with contracted road sealing works elsewhere. The deductions included; Preliminaries, Drainage bill items for both Roads, Excavation to spoil, Rock excavation to spoil, Clearing and grubbing, Removal of existing culverts, earthworks for fill, Ancillary Works and Day work rates.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.2.5 Assessment of Efficiency

The score on efficiency was 13 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
A work programme was not found on file. The works commenced on 16 th March 2018, 15 days after the planned commencement date and 21 days after contract signing. The works were initially expected to be completed on 30 th June 2018, 4 months after commencement. However, on 2 nd May 2018, the contractor requested for time extension up to 30 th September 2018 which was granted on 8 th May 2018. Therefore works were incomplete at the expiry of initial time of completion. Although detailed progress reports were not found on file, some records from the municipality, prepared in July showed physical progress at 65%. The physical progress at the expiry of original time of completion was therefore estimated to be over 30%. Management Response We provided monthly site meeting minutes and the monitoring that we can not sit in meetings per site, impossible. Audit Notes As noted above, in one of the documents submitted to the audit the basis of the assessment.Assessment of physical progress lag basing on initial work programme(a) Assessment of progress of works against time(i)	technical reports for all our team, the municipality indicated	Absence of a detailed work program makes it difficult for the Municipality to track and monitor the progress of the project.we have in files. Note:the physical progress as Delayed completion of works denies the intended users timely use of the infrastructure	he Accounting Officer should;  Ensure that detailed work programs always prepared for all works to be implemented the Municipality.arebyTwe have so many projects such65% in July 2018. This was wasensure always completed in time Put in place measures to that works are	
(ii) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on revised work programme As stated above, the works were extended by three months up to 30 th September 2018. At the time of audit, in the week ending 19 th August, the double surface treatment had just been done and excavation for the u-drain completed. The physical progress was estimated at 85% with 43 days to the expiry of the time extension. Since there was no work program or records of planned productivity, the physical progress lag could not be established.	attention to good project management practices;Inadequate	 Absence of a detailed work program makes it difficult for the Municipality to track and monitor the progress of the project.	The municipality should ensure that the contractor submits revised work programmes periodically as specified in the Special Conditions of Contract (SCC) or as soon as it is observed that the existing work programme has been rendered impractical to enable proper progress monitoring.	




projects,

110











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
Noted for improvement. However, lack of revised program didManagement Response	not affect the work completion	time.		
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed worksPresence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled on effecting payments. The same is required for an admeasure contract adopted for this project. The auditor observed that, for the one IPC so far prepared and paid, detailed measurement sheets were prepared for a number of items, however, the measurement sheets of the first seal coat (Item 42.01) and priming (Item 41.01) were not prepared. Management Response Detailed measurement sheets existed in both had and soft Audit Comment As noted above, the measurement sheets for some items were(i)	of the municipality in regard to measurement of some items of work.to Audit team.present but others were absent.Laxity	of work items could lead to overpayments the contractor thus financial loss to the MunicipalitytoNon-measurement	T he Municipality should ensure that detailed measurement sheets are prepared for all items of work which have been approved and considered for payment and these should be attached payment certificates.to the	
(ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment records showed that the payments were consistent with certified amounts. (iii) Physical verifications to check overpayments The audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were compared to the quantities certified for payment in the payment certificates. Other quantities were derived from the measured quantities basing on recommendations from the General specifications, Clause 4106. Quantity checks of selected items revealed overpayments on several items as detailed in the following Table. The total over payment in the one IPC so far prepared and paid was UGX 8,510,400= equivalent to 1.6% of the certified amount.	- Partial measurements. The prime coat and first seal coat width were not measured.- Failure to provide particular specifications but still fail to follow general specifications.- Poor quality control such as failure to carryout tray tests.N/A	result in financial loss to the Municipality.OkOverpayments	- The Accounting Officer should ensure that the overpayment of UGX.8,510,400 is recovered from the contractorOk	




copies

111











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendations

The audit further discovered that the rate for the first seal - Poor documentation coat for Amoz Obwona road was raised from the original 22,000 to 25,000 in the IPC. No document to this effect was found on file.

Amoz Obwona Road

Item No.	Description	Unit	Audit quantity	Certified quantity	Difference (Certified – Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpayment	Remarks	
41.01(a)	Prime coat; MC 30- cutback bitumen	Ltr	2,541.0	2,193	-348	5,500	-	Considering 1L/m 2 ; Under paid	
41.03	Aggregate for blinding	M 3	8.9	30	21	35,000	738,500	Considering 0.0035m 3 /m 2	
42.01(a)	First seal coat	M 2	2,457.0	2,631	174	25,000	4,350,000	Rate changed from 22,000	
Total							5,088,500		




E ronayo Oryema Road

Item No.	Description	Unit	Audit quantity	Certified quantity	Difference (Certified – Audit)	Rate	Amount of Overpayment	Remarks		
41.01(a)	Prime coat; MC 30- cutback bitumen	Ltr	2,597.3	2,193	-404.3	5,500	-	Considering 1L/m 2 ; Under paid		
41.03	Aggregate for blinding	M 3	9.1	31	21.9	35,000	766,500	Considering 0.0035m 3 /m 2		
42.01(a)	First seal coat	M 2	2,510.3	2,631	120.7	22,000	2,655,400			
Total							3,421,900		




Management Response

Overpayment does not arise as measurement sheets where made and attached to payment. Audit alleged that there was overpayment of about 0.8% which is negligible. The truth is the contract amount was not exceeded either. So this allegation is not true.

Audit Comment

Overpayments have little to do with whether the contract sum was exceeded or not; They arise from measurement quantities of individual items.

(iv) Timeliness in Payments N/A Ok Ok Details of the payments are shown in the table following. As depicted, none of the payments was delayed.

112











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding					Cause			Implication		Recommendations				
Voucher No.PV WK00220 PV WK00214 PV WK00213 PV WK00222No delay No delay No delay No delaypreparedfiled onThe Municipality should ensure that detailed progress reports are periodically, basis preferably on a monthly and the contract management file. Comprehensive project be completion reports should prepared and filed. all The reports should cover but project aspects including time not limited to physical and progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions summarised minutes of meetings.andThe Municipality should avoid combining meetings of different contractors. Meetings of URF contractors should be held separately.Payment DetailsIPC ParticularsDate requested Date certified Date Paid RemarkAmount requested (UGX)Amount certified (UGX)Net Amount paid, Excluding tax (UGX)Absence of progress reports makes it difficult for the Municipality to make informed decisions regarding the implementation of the projectAdvance 10 th March 2018 195,572,388 19 th March 2018 195,572,388 29 th March 2018 195,572,388IPC No.1 12 th June 2018 473,622,000 12 th June 2018 327,930,383 14 th June 2018 327,930,38314 th June 2018 23,023,08214 th June 2018 9,000,000Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring ArrangementsPreparation of progress reports Although available records show that the municipality supervised the works. No detailed progress reports were found on file.Management Responses Note for improvement. But remember the projects are small in nature and very many at the same time. (ii) Organisation of site meetings General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. However, no minutes of the project specific meeting were found on file.Some sensitive contractual matters cannot be discussed in general meetings.(c)(i)IPC ParticularsDate requestedAmount requested (UGX)Date certifiedAmount certified (UGX)Date PaidNet Amount paid, Excluding tax (UGX)Voucher No. RemarkAdvance 10 th March 2018 195,572,388 19 th March 2018 195,572,388 29 th March 2018 195,572,388PV WK00220No delayIPC No.1 12 th June 2018 473,622,000 12 th June 2018 327,930,383 14 th June 2018 327,930,383PV WK00214No delay14 th June 2018 23,023,082PV WK00213No delay14 th June 2018PV WK00222No delayReview of Contract Supervision and Monitoring ArrangementsPreparation of progress reports Although available records show that the municipality supervised the works. No detailed progress reports were found on file.(c)(i)Absence of progress reports makes it difficult for the Municipality to make informed decisions regarding the implementation of the projectpreparedfiled onThe Municipality should ensure that detailed progress reports are periodically, preferably on a monthly and the contract management Comprehensive project completion reports should prepared and filed. The reports should cover project aspects including not limited to physical and progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions summarised minutes of meetings.and														
														
														
														
														
														
														




IPC Particulars	Date requested	Amount requested (UGX)	Date certified		Amount certified (UGX)	Date Paid		Net Amount paid, Excluding tax (UGX)		Voucher No.	Remark	
Advance	10 th March 2018	195,572,388	19 th March 2018		195,572,388	29 th March 2018		195,572,388		PV WK00220	No delay	
IPC No.1	12 th June 2018	473,622,000	12 th June 2018		327,930,383	14 th June 2018		327,930,383		PV WK00214	No delay	
						14 th June 2018		23,023,082		PV WK00213	No delay	
								14 th June 2018		PV WK00222	No delay	
Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring ArrangementsPreparation of progress reports Although available records show that the municipality supervised the works. No detailed progress reports were found on file.(c)(i)							Absence of progress reports makes it difficult for the Municipality to make informed decisions regarding the implementation of the project		preparedfiled onThe Municipality should ensure that detailed progress reports are periodically, preferably on a monthly and the contract management Comprehensive project completion reports should prepared and filed. The reports should cover project aspects including not limited to physical and progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions summarised minutes of meetings.and			




113











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendations	
inTManagement Response It is true, as noted by Auditors, we called one site meeting for all contract works going on at the same time (small local contracts) to avoid fatigue of meetings seeing their number. This is good management and all matters of concerning the contract were tackled. Audit Comment The contract sum of this perticuar project was UGX 977,861,939. It does not appear a “good management” practice to combine a site meeting for such a project with projects of less than UGX 100 Million. Contractual matters cannot be the same. (iii) Approved supervising personnel on site The Municipal Engineer was appointed as the contract supervisor (Project Manager) to supervise the works.(iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of the audit, the major works of double surface treatment were complete, there were no site activities going on at the time, although the u-drain had been excavated. Materials and equipment for casting concrete had not been mobilised. Since there were no progress reports, the equipment used during works execution could not be verified. Management Responses Noted for improvement.he Accounting Officer should put in place measures to ensure that contractors are always adequately mobilized the course of execution of worksof equipment hinders the progress of works delaying completionthusAbsenceN/A Ok Ok				




3.2.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 22 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(a) Assessment of implementationthe quality of works under(i) Material test results on file Material test results particular to this project were not found on file.Management Responses Note that we had a full file of road material tests including for Audit Comment	Oryema and Amoz-	Failure to have materials tested may lead to use of poor quality materials which may in turn cause production of sub- standard works.roads. Audit could	conducted forThe municipality should ensure that material tests are all projects, results kept on file, reported about in monthly progress reports and attached to payment certificates.missed it just.	




Eronayo Obwona have

114











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause		Implication		Recommendation		
The management response was not accompanied by verifiable evidence in regard to the material test results particular to this project. Material test results of road projects implemented under USMID funding in the same financial year were seen on file but not for this URF project. The municipality may however present them for verification.- The Accounting Officer should always ensure that works are executed as per design drawings and physical specifications so as to ensure that the completed infrastructure performs as intended- Delayed construction of the u-drain which has caused erosion of the vertical trench at edge of the surface dressing. - The dimensions of the drain excavation may have been found to be smaller due to change in design. - Failure to control levels when preparing the base layer.- Further delays in construction of the drain will cause further damage to the road which may require reconstruction of some sections. - The constructed pavement structure is inferior to the designed one which may cause early failure.Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications Road width was checked for the two roads. The results are presented in the following table. From the table, it was established that the road width was slightly narrower than specified at two points on Amoz Obwona and at five points on Eronayo Oryema road. In addition the existing excavation for the u-drain was found to be insufficient for the designed size of the drain. Furthermore the thickness of the gravel base was not achieved at the three locations checked on Amoz Obwona road. No record was found on file about the change in design of the drain.Amoz Obwona Road Items Chainage Unit0+020 0+040 0+080 0+120 0+180 0+220 0+260m m m m m m m mmRoad widthExcavation for U-drain (Excluding allowance for gravel bedding) Modified gravel base thickness0+040- 0+200RHS0+050 LHSDrawings/ Specifications 8.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 0.7 WidthField checks/ measurements 8.7 8.5 8.6 8.4 8.5 8.5 8.5 0.5 WidthConformityOk; Junction Ok Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec Ok Ok Ok Non-Conforming0.6 Depth 0.4 Depth Non-Conformingmm 150136 Average thickness = 110.7mmNon-Conforming(ii)Items Chainage UnitDrawings/ SpecificationsField checks/ measurementsConformityRoad width0+020 m 8.5 8.7 Ok; Junction 0+040 m 8.5 8.5 Ok 0+080 m 8.5 8.6 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+120 m 8.5 8.4 Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec 0+180 m 8.5 8.5 Ok 0+220 m 8.5 8.5 Ok 0+260 m 8.5 8.5 Ok Excavation for U-drain (Excluding allowance for gravel bedding)0+040- 0+200RHSm 0.7 Width 0.5 Width Non-Conforming m 0.6 Depth 0.4 Depth Non-ConformingModified gravel base thickness0+050 LHSmm 150136 Average thickness = 110.7mmNon-Conforming												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												
												




Items	Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements	Conformity		
Road width	0+020	m	8.5	8.7	Ok; Junction		
	0+040	m	8.5	8.5	Ok		
	0+080	m	8.5	8.6	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec		
	0+120	m	8.5	8.4	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec		
	0+180	m	8.5	8.5	Ok		
	0+220	m	8.5	8.5	Ok		
	0+260	m	8.5	8.5	Ok		
Excavation for U-drain (Excluding allowance for gravel bedding)	0+040- 0+200RHS	m	0.7 Width	0.5 Width	Non-Conforming		
		m	0.6 Depth	0.4 Depth	Non-Conforming		
Modified gravel base thickness	0+050 LHS	mm	150	136	Average thickness = 110.7mm	Non-Conforming	




115











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

0+150 CL mm 150 85 Non-Conforming 0+250 RHS

E ronayo Oryema Road

111 mm 150 Non-Conforming

Items	Chainage	Unit	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements	Conformity	
Road width	0+010	m	8.5	9.8	Ok; Junction	
	0+020	m	8.5	8.5	Ok	
	0+080	m	8.5	8.3	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
	0+120	m	8.5	8.3	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
	0+180	m	8.5	8.35	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
	0+220	m	8.5	8.4	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
	0+260	m	8.5	8.3	Not Ok; non-compliant with Clause 7304(b) of the Gen. Spec	
Excavation for U-drain (Excluding allowance for gravel bedding)	0+040- 0+240RHS	m	0.7 Width	0.5 Average Width	Non-Conforming	
		m	0.6 Depth	0.4 Average Depth	Non-Conforming	




From the tables above, only 7 out of 21 (representing 33% conformance) points checked conformed to the required physical specifications.

Management Response

- At the time of Audit, the contract period was still on and the ongoing work was caonstruction of drainage chanel. This was as per the contractor’s program and it did not affect completion time neither was the work spoiled for delay.
- Audit noted there were smaller variation in with of ranging from 0.1m to 0.2m ie (100m to 200mm). this normal and negiglegible as it did not affect the project cost. It is compensated by thickness of the concreret drainage walls which is more than specified by that average.

(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications

DCP tests were conducted on Amoz Obwona road and the in-situ - Ok Ok CBR was determined at different points along the road. The results obtained as shown in the following table show that the CBR requirements expected for G30 material were met.

Audit

Test

Results

Location	Auditor’s Result (%CBR)	Specification (G30)	Comment	
0+050 LHS	89	30	Passed	
0+150 CL	47	30	Passed	
0+250 RHS	33	30	Passed	




116











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding					Cause			Implication	Recommendation	
(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defects The auditors inspected works on 14 th August 2018 in the presence of the Engineering Staff from Gulu Municipal Engineer’s Office. The second seal had just been placed about two weeks ago and excavation for the u-drain had been done. There was no activity at site but the contractor’s site manager was present. The following were observed during the inspection; Eroding vertical sides of the trench at edge of surface dressing and ponding of water in the drain trenches for both roads the drain.Delayed concrete works of The contractor informed the audit team that they are waiting for metallic formwork which is to be hired from somewhere else.Risk of further damage to the road which may necessitate reconstruction of some sections.The Municipality should ensure that the contractor executes the concrete works as soon as possible to prevent further damage to the road.Erosion of the edges and ponding of waterMunicipality should ensure that the contractor executes the concrete works as soon as possible to prevent further damage to the road.of ponding and subsequent failure of the vertical excavation.Management Response It should be noted that work is a process. Depending on how the contractor makes his program. In this case, the storm side drain was the last to be made. And it was excavated and left and attended to. It was completed successfully. Eronayo Oryema Road Blocked trench; Some residents have blocked the excavated trench at some points to create access to their homes as shown in the following photographs.concrete works of the drain and access slabs.Management Response This was done by the locals but the contractor later opened and constructed them finished.Delayed Risk The										
										
										
										
										




117











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure (i) Observed functionality and usage At the time of audit, the roads had just received the double surface treatment and were open to traffic.	-	Ok	Ok	
(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety (i) Environmental and Social impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions No records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures. Absence of detailed progress reports is no recorded evidence of implementation of measures to preserve the health and safety of the workers and the community.implies that there	environmental and socialimpact monitoring.Inadequate	to environmental and social impact mitigation requirements including health and safety.Risk of non-compliance	screening should be carried out. - Environmental and Social Management Plan should be prepared. - Monitoring of compliance to environmental and social impact safeguards should be done. - Measures to preserve the health and safety of the contractor’s workers and the community should be enforced by the project supervisor and should be reported about in progress reports.- Environmental and social	
Management Response The environmental concerns were taken care off although social screening was low. No arm was realised to the community.				




118











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.3

Project Title: Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House and Two-Stance Water Borne Toilet at Obiya West Primary School

The project was implemented by Gulu Municipal Council with funding from Ministry of Education under the School Facilitation Grant (SFG) programme.

3.3.1 Contract Details The project details are presented in the following table.

Table 3.3-1: Contract Details

Implementing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	Ministry Of Education (SFG)	
Works contractor	Acak Ki Kwene Construction and General Supply Limited	
Procurement ReferenceNo.	Gulu 754/Wrks/17-18/00003	
Date of contract award	2 nd February 2018	
Contract signing date	6 th February 2018	
Commencement date	11 th February 2018 (As per signed contract, 5 days from date of signing of Contract)	
Actual commencementdate	12 th February 2018	
Original contract period	No information	
Initial date of completion	June 2018	
Revised date of completion	N/A	
Actual Completion Date	8 th June 2018	
Contract amount	UGX 83,321,770= VAT inclusive	
Engineers estimate	UGX 91,599,000=	
Actual value of work done	UGX 83,321,770=	




3.3.2 Scope of Works The scope of the works included; Excavation, Construction of substructure, walling, roofing, plastering, painting and fittings.

3.3.3 Status of works at the time of audit At the time of audit, construction of the house was complete though still in DLP of











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.3.4 Assessment of Economy

The score on economy was 22.75 out of 30 as detailed below; (a) Assessment of the price difference between similar quality and quantity of works

i) Comparison of unit project item costs as per Engineer’s estimates

A review was made of the engineer’s estimates for all the SFG (and where applicable DDEG) projects in all the Municipalities and the lowest engineer’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu engineer’s rates was made against the lowest engineer’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.3-2: Comparison of Engineers Estimates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Eng. Est. Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (1*Fm/F)	Percentage of Engineer’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	38,500	18,500	0.48	208%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	10,000	5,000	0.50	200%	
230mm walling	m 2	32,000	20,000	0.63	160%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	8,000	3,000	0.38	267%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	400,000	110,000	0.28	364%	
Total Score				2.27	Average = 240%	




The Municipality scored 2.27 out of 5. The engineer’s estimates were on average 140% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across the municipalities. This could be attributed to the local conditions and pricing of items at the time of estimation.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Table 3.3-3: Comparison of Contractor’s Rates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Contract Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm/F)	Percentage of Contractor’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	21,500	17,000	1.58	126%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	10,000	6,000	1.20	167%	
230mm walling	m 2	33,000	30,000	1.82	110%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	5,500	2,000	0.73	275%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	325,000	250,000	1.54	130%	
Total Score				6.87	Average = 162%	




The Municipality scored 6.87 out of 10. The contractor’s rates were onaverage 62% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across the municipalities. This could be attributed to the following;

- Contractor’s pricing strategy;
- Prevailing market prices of items at the time of procurement;
- Geographical location of the municipality in comparison to proposed material sources.

Management Response

We shall improve in due couse.

iii) Comparison of unit cost per square meter of works











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Table 3.3-4: Comparison of Project Unit Costs

Cost per Square Meter of Building Works (F) (UGX)	Lowest Cost per Square Meter of Building Works Among Municipalities (Fm) (UGX)	Score (15*Fm/F)	Proportion of the Project Unit Cost to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)	
601,450	545,686	13.61	1.10	




The Municipality scored 13.61 out of 15. The project’s unit cost per square meter is 1.10 times higher than that of the Municipality with the lowest unit cost per square meter of building works of similar value across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the quoted prices provided by the contractor.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program 3.3.5 Assessment of Efficiency

The score on efficiency was 21 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Assessment of physical progress lag basing on initial work programme According to the signed contract, the commencement date was on 11 th February 2018 and works were initially expected to achieve 100% completion by the end of June 2018. As indicated on IPC No.1, works commenced on 12 th February 2018 and were completed on 8 th June 2018. Therefore, there was no physical progress lag in the execution of this Project. ii) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on revised work programme As elaborated in (i) above, works were completed within the planned time and no revised programme was required.(a) Assessment of progress of works against timei)	N/AN/A	OkOk	OkOk	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed worksPresence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled upon completion of the contract. The same is required for an admeasure contract adopted for this project. Measurement sheets corresponding the payment certificates were neither attached to the certificates nor availed to the auditors for verification. In the absence of these, the audit team could not ascertain whether the Municipality undertook measurementto(i)		exposesof works the Municipality to the risk of loss of funds through overpayments the contractor.toNon-measurement	Municipality should ensure that detailed measurements are carried out regularly during works progress an admeasure contract, these detailed measurement sheets should be kept on file andforThe	




123











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding					Cause			Implication		Recommendation			
of works during the process of certification.Management Response The measurement sheets (MS) were sent to audit team in Kitgum when Audit Comment The audit team did not receive any measurement sheets. The assessment is based on verifiable evidence. (ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment certificate showed that the payments were consistent with certified amounts. (iii) Physical verifications to check any overpayments The audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were compared to the quantities certified for payment in the payment certificate. The table below summarizes the quantities verified. The total amount of overpayment is UGX 4,691,900 equivalent to 5.6% of the certified amount.Unitudit Measurement checks Item Description No.A4(b) 6(c) 8(d) 8(e) 4(e) 6(e) 5(f)Rafters Floor finish Ceiling mortar casting Ceiling plaster finish Gauge 28 roofing sheets (toilet) Rough Cast finish (toilet) Internal metallic door frameM M 2 M 2 M 2 M 2 M 2 No.Item No.Description Unit4(b) Rafters M 6(c) Floor finish M28(d) Ceiling mortar casting M28(e) Ceiling plaster finish M24(e) Gauge 28 roofing sheets (toilet) M26(e) Rough Cast finish (toilet) M25(f) Internal metallic door frame No.					they said they had not can avail theMunicipality to conductdetailed measurements.by theN/AReluctance			toMeasurement sheets sheets incase they areresult in financial loss the Municipality.OkOverpayments		attached to the payment certificates.file, by TC. present because theAccounting Officer should ensure that the overpayment of UGX.4,691,900 is recovered from the contractor.TheOk			
						Audit QuantityAudit Quantity		Certified QuantityCertified Quantity	(Audit- Certified)(Audit- Certified)		Overpayment Overpayment		
						125.8 125.8		130.0 130.0	4.2 4.2		21,000 21,000		
						108.7 108.7		142.0 142.0	33.3 33.3		266,400 266,400		
						117.2 117.2		205.0 205.0	87.8 87.8		965,800 965,800		
						117.2 117.2		205.0 205.0	87.8 87.8		1,053,600 1,053,600		
						6.8 6.8		19.2 19.2	12.4 12.4		248,000 248,000		
						14.9 14.9		16.8 16.8	1.9 1.9		17,100 17,100		
						0 0		8 8	8 8		1,680,000 1,680,000		




seen on

municipality measurement

Item No.	Description	Unit	Rate	Audit Quantity	Certified Quantity	Difference (Audit- Certified)	Overpayment	
4(b)	Rafters	M	5,000	125.8	130.0	4.2	21,000	
6(c)	Floor finish	M 2	8,000	108.7	142.0	33.3	266,400	
8(d)	Ceiling mortar casting	M 2	11,000	117.2	205.0	87.8	965,800	
8(e)	Ceiling plaster finish	M 2	12,000	117.2	205.0	87.8	1,053,600	
4(e)	Gauge 28 roofing sheets (toilet)	M 2	20,000	6.8	19.2	12.4	248,000	
6(e)	Rough Cast finish (toilet)	M 2	9,000	14.9	16.8	1.9	17,100	
5(f)	Internal metallic door frame	No.	210,000	0	8	8	1,680,000	




124











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause									Implication Recommendation				
5(i)	Internal doors 900x2100mm No.						220,000 6 8 2					440,000	
Total												4,691,900	
Management Responses													
environmental concerns were taken care of although social screening was low. No arm was realised to the community. If this MS provided were followed, these issues would not have arisen.													
Comment													
municipality should give more clarity on this.													
Ok(iv) Timeliness in Payments General Conditions of Contract require that payments shall be made the Procuring and Disposing Entity, no later than 30 days after submission and certification of a request for payment. Audit noted payments by the Municipality were as detailed below. Assessment of the payment records revealed that the Municipality invoices submitted on time as per the signed contract.Ok Ok													
Payment Records													
No. Particulars			Date		Amount requested	Date certified		Amount Date Paid		Amount	Remark		
			requested		(UGX)			certified		paid			
								(UGX)		(UGX)			
79,155,68111 th June 2018 74,406,341 14 th June 2018 71,697,560 No delays in paymentIPC No.1 7 th June1 2018													
by the of detailed Municipality should municipality to prepare project specific reports.progress reports makes it difficult for the Municipality to make informed decisions regarding theensure that progress reports are prepared and filed on the contract management file. Comprehensive projectReview of Contract Supervision and MonitoringPreparation of progress reports Municipality supervised the works. Brief supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works. No detailed progress reports were prepared and no completion report availed to the auditors. It was therefore considered unavailable.ArrangementsReluctance Absence The													




The

Audit

The

by that paid

(c) (i)

The

was

125











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Management Response If the reports provided were not sufficient, we shall improve as advised (ii) Organisation of site meetings General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. No records of project specific site meetings were found on file.Management Response Joint meetings with several contractors for small works can not be with too many meetings. This not healthy for our management.Comment Each project has its own unique challenges that need to be addressed meeting and respective site minutes. (iii) Approved supervising personnel on site Audit observed that the Assistant Municipal Engineer in charge ofAudit	he municipality explained that with many contracts running at the same time, separate meetings could not be organised.Tby the Auditors.avoided because of contract works ofin a specific siteOk	implementation of the projectcontractual matters cannot be discussed in general meetings.issue. Management and above shall beAccodingly each projectSomeOk	completion reports should be prepared and filed. The reports should cover all project aspects including but not limited to physical and time progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions and summarised minutes of meetings.Municipality should avoid combining meetings of different contractors. Project specific meetings should be organised.would be too overwhelmed treated separate big one.should have its own siteTheOk	




management

However, Ugx.500m

meeting.

126











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
buildings was appointed as the project manager. (iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of Audit, the works were completed therefore there was no equipment on site.				




3.3.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 16.8 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
the quality of works underMaterial test results on file Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results on file.(a) Assessment of implementation(i)	Quality control procedures could have been ignored.	Non-testing of construction materials can result in the use of poor quality materials ultimately affecting the quality of the infrastructure.	The Accounting officer should ensure that materials used the works are tested to ensure conformance to quality requirements.for	
Management Response It is true, material tests were not on file for each SFG project. However, some material tests for aggregates and sand are on the road files as the sources are the same. Other things are, we use the manufacturers’ specifications eg. Reinforcement bars, cements, iron sheets. These are very sufficient for the local projects with limited funding for administrative cost. Audit Comment The management response was not accompanied by verifiable evidence in regard to the material test results for building construction projects. Test results for aggregates were not availed and Manufacturer’s certificates were not seen. The municipality may however present them for verification.				
(ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications Conformance to design for some items was checked by the auditors. The results are presented in the table below. As shown in the table, non-conformity to specifications was observed on the doors and windows. However, documentation for these variations was not seen on the Contract Management File.	quality control procedures and lack of attention to design details.Poor	to meet the specified physical specifications may lead to the infrastructure failing to perform asFailure	Accounting Officer should always ensure that works are executed as per design and physical specifications so asdrawingsThe	




127











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding				Cause		Implication	Recommendation		
				intended.	to ensure that completed performs as intendedthe infrastructure		
Specifications/ Drawings 16,668x7,690mm 1.2x1.2m (6No.) 1.2x1.5m (2No.) 900x2100mm (8No)Field checks/ measurements 16,650x770mm 1.2x1.37m (2No.) 1.4x1.5m (6No.) 900x2140mm (6No)Conformity Ok Non-conforming Non-conforming Non-conformingChecks for Design Conformance No. 1 2 3 4Items External dimensions Window size (No.) Window size (No.) Internal doors (No.)									
									
									
									
									
									
table above shows that only one item out of the four items checked conformed to the physical specifications/drawings, representing 25% conformanceResponse The contractor decided to give us slightly more at his own cost; Negligible.TheManagement									
(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement- sand mortar finishes.				N/A		N/A	N/A		
(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defects The auditors inspected works on 5 th September 2018 in the presence of the Engineering Staff from Municipal Engineer’s Office of Gulu. The following were observed:									
Recently repaired cracks were observed on the floor running in different directions. However, the repair was poorly done and the cracks are re-surfacing as seen in the following photo.				Laxity in supervision of works; curing of the screed was poorly done.		Poorly repaired cracks tend to re-appear which leads to wastage of resources in frequent repairs.	The cracked portion of the floor should be hacked away and re-done.		




128











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Cracks showing up even after repair				
access for animals such as cats, snakes and rats.defect should be addressed by welding steel plates to the bottoms of door shutters.errors.Wide gaps between shutters and the floor at exits. Construction Easy The				
Management Responses on observed defects The works is still under defects liability periods. All defects identified is currently being corrected promptly. Follow up audit shall prove this.				
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure(i) Observed functionality and usage At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been occupied by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.N/A Ok Ok				
(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety(i) Environmental and Social impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions of non-compliance Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Socialenvironmental and social impact monitoring.to environmental and social impact mitigation requirements including- Environmental and Social Management Plan should be prepared.- Environmental and social screening should be Risk carried out. Inadequate				




129











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file. Absence of detailed progress reports implies that there is no recorded evidence of implementation of measures to preserve the health and safety of the workers and the community at large.		health and safety.	- Monitoring of compliance to environmental and social impact safeguards should be done. - Measures to preserve the health and safety of the contractor’s workers and the community should be enforced by the project supervisor and should be reported about in progress reports.	
Management Response Environmental issues were fully captured but the social one was less captured. We shall improve this.				




130











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.4

Project Title: Construction of a 5 Stance Water Borne Toilet at St. Joseph’s Primary School

The project was implemented by Gulu Municipal Council with funding from Ministry of Education under the School Facilitation Grant (SFG) programme.

3.4.1 Contract Details The project details are presented in the following table.

Table 3.4-1: Contract Details

Implementing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	Ministry of Education (SFG)	
Works contractor	Wa General Traders	
Procurement Reference No.	Gulu 754/Wrks/2017-2018/00013	
Date of contract award	02 nd February, 2018	
Contract signing date	06 th February, 2018	
Commencement date	13 th February, 2018 ( As per signed contract, 7days from date of signing of Contract)	
Actual commencement date	25 th February 2018	
Original contract period	No information given	
Initial date of completion	June, 2018	
Revised date of completion	N/A	
Actual Completion Date	13 th June 2018	
Contract amount	UGX 23,319,896= VAT inclusive	
Engineers estimate	UGX. 24,599,930=	
Actual value of work done	UGX. 23,319,896=	




3.4.2 Scope of Works The scope of the works included; excavation, construction of substructure, walling, roofing, plastering, painting, fittings, plumbing, and finishes.

3.4.3 Status of works at the time of audit At the time of audit, construction of the five stance toilet was completed but not yet open for use.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.4.4 Assessment of Economy

The score on economy was 22.76 out of 30 as detailed below; (a) Assessment of the price difference between similar quality and quantity of works i)

Comparison of unit project item costs as per Engineer’s estimates

A review was made of the engineer’s estimates for all the SFG (and where applicable DDEG) projects in all the municipalities and the lowest engineer’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu’s engineer’s rates was made against the lowest engineer’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.4-2: Comparison of Engineers Estimates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Eng. Est. Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (1*Fm/F)	Percentage of Engineer’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	18,000	15,000	0.83	120%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	5,000	5,000	1.00	100%	
230mm walling	m 2	38,000	18,500	0.49	205%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	10,000	3,000	0.30	333%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	350,000	150,000	0.43	233%	
Total Score				3.05	Average = 198%	




The Municipality scored 3.05 out of 5. The engineer’s estimates were on average 98% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the local conditions and pricing of items at the time of estimation.

Management response











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Table 3.4-3: Comparison of Contractor’s Rates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Contract Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm/F)	Percentage of Contractor’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	30,000	20,000	1.33	150%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	12,000	5,000	0.83	240%	
230mm walling	m 2	35,000	10,000	0.57	350%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	7,000	4,000	1.14	175%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	200,000	200,000	2.00	100%	
Total Score				5.87	Average = 203%	




The Municipality scored 5.87 out of 10. The contractor’s rates for 4 out of 5 items were higher than the lowest rates. Generally, the contractor’s rates were on average 103% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the following;

- Contractor’s pricing strategy;
- Prevailing market prices of items at the time of procurement;
- Geographical location of the municipality in comparison to proposed material sources.

iii) Comparison of unit cost per square meter of works

A review was made of the unit cost per square metre of infrastructure for all SFG (and DDEG where applicable) projects in all the Municipalities and the lowest unit cost per square metre was identified. A comparison of Gulu project unit cost per square meter was made against the lowest unit cost per square metre among the Municipalities. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Cost per Square Meter of Building Works (F) (UGX)	Lowest Cost per Square Meter of Building Works Among Municipalities (Fm) (UGX)	Score (15*Fm/F)	Proportion of the Project Unit Cost to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)	
636,148	586,886	13.84	1.08	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Management response

Audit should take keen interest in the analysis of rates: eg. It is not possible that building a wall should cost UGX 10,000 per m 2 Or that plaster should cost only UGX

5,000.

And Roofing sheets G28; GMC uses prepainted sheets, what about others.?

Audit Comment

It is next to impossible to find several projects with the exact same scope of works, size and specifications. Audit therefore clustered projects of “nearly” similar scope as described in Section 2.5 of this report.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.4.5 Assessment of Efficiency

The score on efficiency was 24 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(a) Assessment of progress of works against timeAssessment of physical progress lag basing on initial work programme Works were planned to commence on 13 th February 2018 and were initially expected to achieve 100% completion by end of June, 2018. Payment records indicate a commencement date of 25 th February 2018. The works were completed on 13 th June 2018 as indicated on IPC No.2. Therefore, the project was completed in time and the physical progress lag was 0%. ii) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on revised work programme As elaborated in (i) above, works were completed within the contract duration. Therefore, no revised programme was required.i)	Ok N/A	Ok Ok	Ok Ok	
(b) Assessment existence effectiveness certification and payment of executed workscontrolsof ofthe internaland for(i) Presence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled upon completion of the contract. The same is required for an admeasure contract adopted this project. Measurement sheets corresponding to the payment certificates were neither attached to the certificates nor availed to the auditors for verification. In the absence of these, the audit team could not ascertain whether the Municipality undertook measurement of works during the process of certification. Non-measurement of works can lead to the risk of overpayments.for	attention to proper good management practices and contract administration.Inadequate	of works exposes the Municipality to the risk of loss of funds through overpayments to the contractor.Non-measurement	that theAccounting officer should ensure project manager takes measurements for works during execution. These should be signed by the project and contractor’s representative, kept on file and attached to the payment certificates when prepared.managerThe	




135











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

(ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment certificate showed that the N/A Ok Ok payments were consistent with certified amounts.

(iii) Physical verifications to check any overpayments

Failure by the The audit team undertook physical measurements of the municipality to quantities of some of the constructed works and these carryout field were compared to the quantities certified for payment in measurement the payment certificate. Total amount of overpayment is checks. UGX 1,022,500 equivalent to 4.9% of the certified amount. The table below summarizes the quantities verified.

Audit

Measurement

checks

Overpayments The Accounting Officer should result in financial ensure that the overpayment of loss to the UGX.1,022,500 is recovered Municipality. from the contractor.

Item No.	Description	Unit	Rate	Audit Quantity	Certified Quantity	Difference (Audit- Certified)	Overpayment	Remarks	
3(a)	Walling forsuperstructure	M 2		60.4	43.5			Underpayment	
3(b)	Walling of the curtain wall	M 2		13.5	14.2			Ok	
4(b)	Roofing timber(50x100mm rafters)	M	7,000	16.1	35.0	18.9	132,300		
4(c)	Roofing timber(50x100mm Purlins)	M	5,000	22.5	28.0	5.5	27,500		
4(e)	Roof Cover28)(Gauge	M 2	30,000	21.3	43.0	21.7	651,000		
4(d)	Fascia board	M	7,000	20.4	42.0	21.6	151,200		
6(d)	Rough cast finish	M 2	5,000	32.9	45.0	12.1	60,500		
Total							1,022,500		




.

Management Response

Overpayment was noted for recovery from retention after thorough checking.

Audit Comment

To be followed up.

136











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding							Cause		Implication		Recommendation					
(iv) Timeliness in Payments General Conditions of Contract require that payments shall be made by the Procuring and Disposing Entity, no later than 30 days after submission and certification of a request for payment. Audit noted that payments by the Municipality were as detailed below. Assessment of the payment records revealed that the Municipality was paying the invoices timely as per the signed contract. Payment Details No. Particulars Date requestedAmount requested (UGX) IPC No.1 7 th May 2018 12,965,400IPC No.2 1 st June 2018 10,354,49612							Ok		Ok		Ok					
							Date requested	Amount requested (UGX)			Date certified		Date Paid	Amount paid (UGX)		
																
																
							IPC No.1	7 th May 2018	12,965,400		th May 2018		25 th May 2018	11,456,227		
							IPC No.2	1 st June 2018	10,354,496		th June 2018	8,543,191	20 th June 2018	8,543,190		
Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements (i) Preparation of progress reports The Municipality supervised the works. Brief supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works. No detailed progress reports were prepared and no completion report was availed to the auditors. It was therefore considered unavailable.Management Response Noted for improvement. The actual reports were in place.(c)							by the municipality to prepare project specific reports.Reluctance		progress reports makes it difficult for the Municipality to make informed decisions regarding the implementation of the projectAbsence of detailed		Municipality should ensure that progress reports are prepared and filed on the contract management file. Comprehensive project completion reports should be prepared and filed. The reports should cover all project aspects including but not limited to physical and time progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions and summarised minutes of meetings.The					




Amount Remarks

certified

(UGX)

11 12,187,476 No delays in payment 14 No delays in payment

137











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Audit Comment Supervision reports (Not detailed progress reports) were seen but of inadequate quality as already stated above. Progress reporting should be as per the recommendation. (ii) Organisation of site meetings General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. No records of project specific site meetings were found on fileMunicipality should avoid combining meetings of different contractors. Project specific meetings should be organised.contractual matters cannot be discussed in general meetings.municipality explained that with many contracts running at the same time, separate meetings could not be organised. Management Response GMC shall be overstretched with too many meetings if we should all site meetings per site. Remember these are small but very many sites. To alow us function, general meeting is unavoidable. However, management will consider the best option to take. Audit Comment Each project has its own unique challenges that need to be addressed in a specific site meeting. Accodingly each project should have its own site meeting and respective site minutesApproved supervising personnel on site Ok Ok Ok Audit observed that Assistant Engineer Buildings was appointed as the contract supervisor(iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of Audit, the works were completed therefore no equipment was on site.The Some The(iii)				




138











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 28 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
testing on(i) Material test results on file Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results. In absence of these, the audit could not ascertain whether the Municipality undertook material the construction materials that were used. Management Response Tests of materials from the same sources are shared and and sand are on the road files, seen by auditors. For DPC, steels, iron sheets. etc. Audit Comment The management response was not accompanied by projects. Test results for aggregates were not availed present them for verification. It is good practice to keep a complete project project should be part of the file since absence of these (ii) Conformance of site works to design(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementationdrawings and physical specifications Some of the work items were checked by the audit team to ascertain conformance to design drawings and specifications. The results are presented in the table below. From the table, all items checked conformed to the drawings and specifications. .	procedures could have been ignored.not repeated. Eg. Test materials, weevidence in respect and Manufacturer’sfile covering all raises doubts regardingQuality control	Non-testing of construction materials can result in the use of poor quality materials ultimately affecting the quality of the infrastructure.aggregates, tensile rely on the manufacturers’to the material test were not seen.aspects. Material material tests for the	forThe Accounting officer should ensure that materials used the works are always to ensure conformance quality requirements.tested tostrength of reinforcement wires specifications. Eg. Cement,results for building construction municipality may howevertest results particular to each in question.	




for manufactured

verifiable certificates The

management project project

139











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding			Cause	Implication		Recommendation		
Checks for Design Conformance								
No.	Items Drawings/ Specifications				Field checks/ measurements		Conformity	
1	External dimensions of the structure 6700x3150mm				6740x3140mm		Ok	
3	Height of screen wall 2.0m				2.0m		Ok	
4	Rafters 100x50mm				100x50mm		Ok	
5	Purlins 75x50mm				75x50mm		Ok	
6	Walkway 1000mm wide				1030mm wide		Ok	
								
Management Response								
concur with Auditor.								
Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.N/A N/A N/A								
Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defects auditors inspected works on 8 th August 2018 in the presence of the Engineering Staff from Municipal Engineer’s Office Gulu. The following were observed:								
toilet had just been completed and no defects observed on the toilet structure. However, there telltale signs that rain water run-off from the rear of the toilet flows onto splash apron as shown below.This may cause erosion at the ground level of the apron.Lack of protection works around the structure.The run-off should be re- directed away from the toilet by excavating a trench at the rear end, a few metres from the splash apron.								
Assessment ofinfrastructurethe utilisation of theObserved functionality and usagethe time of audit, works were complete, but theN/A Ok. Ok.								




.

I

(iii)

(iv)

The

The were were end

(b)

(i)

At

140











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
facility had not yet been put to use by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.				
Management Response There was delay in commissioning due to defects detected and instruction ordering the Contractor to make correction of defects. But it is now in use.				
(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of impact(i)environmental and social requirements, health and safety Environmental and Social impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file.Management Response Environmental and gender issues were fully attended to,	environmental and social impact monitoring.however, the social issuesInadequate	non- to and impactof compliance environmental social mitigation requirements including health and safety.were less feasible.Risk	- The Accounting officershould ensure that Environmnetal and social screening be carried out, the - Environmental and Social Management Plan is be prepared. - Monitoring of compliance to environmental and social impact is carried out.safeguards- Measures to preserve the health and safety of the contractor’s workers and the community are enforced by the project supervisor and should be reported about in progress reports.shall improve on this.	




GMC 141











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.5

Project Title: Construction of Two-Unit Teachers House at Layibi Central Primary School

The project was implemented by Gulu Municipal Council with funding from the Office of the Prime Mininster under the DDEG programme.

3.5.1 Contract Details The project details are presented in the following table.

Table 3.5-1: Contract Details

Implementing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	Discretionary Development Equalization Grant (DDEG)	
Works contractor	Build Skills Consult Limited	
ProcurementNo.Reference	Gulu 754/Wrks/17-18/00002	
Date of contract award	2 nd February 2018	
Contract signing date	6 th February 2018	
Commencement date	11 th February 2018 (As per signed contract, 5 days from date of signing of Contract)	
Actual commencementdate	13 th February 2018	
Original contract period	No information	
Initial date of completion	June 2018	
Revisedcompletiondateof	N/A	
Actual Completion Date	No information	
Contract amount	UGX 73,644,080= VAT inclusive	
Engineers estimate	No information	
Actual value of work done	UGX 73,644,080=	




3.5.2 Scope of Works The scope of the works included; excavation, construction of substructure, walling, roofing, plastering, painting and fittings.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.5.4 Assessment of Economy

The score on economy was 23.14 out of 30 as detailed below; (a) Assessment of the price difference between similar quality and quantity of works i)

Comparison of unit project item costs as per Engineer’s estimates

A review was made of the engineer’s estimates for all the SFG (and where applicable DDEG) projects in all the Municipalities and the lowest engineer’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu engineer’s rates was made against the lowest engineer’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.5-2: Comparison of Engineers Estimates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Eng. Est. Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (1*Fm/F)	Percentage of Engineer’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	38,500	18,500	0.48	208%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	10,000	5,000	0.50	200%	
230mm walling	m 2	32,000	20,000	0.63	160%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	8,000	3,000	0.38	267%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	400,000	110,000	0.28	364%	
Total Score				2.27	Average = 240%	




The Municipality scored 2.27 out of 5. The engineer’s estimates were on average 140% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the local conditions and pricing of items at the time of estimation.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Table 3.5-3: Comparison of Contractor’s Rates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Contract Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm/F)	Percentage of Contractor’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	17,000	17,000	2.00	100%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	8,000	6,000	1.50	133%	
230mm walling	m 2	40,000	30,000	1.50	133%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	2,000	2,000	2.00	100%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	400,000	250,000	1.25	160%	
Total Score				8.25	Average = 125%	




The Municipality scored 8.25 out of 10. Generally, the contractor’s rates were on average 25% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the following;

- Contractor’s pricing strategy;
- Prevailing market prices of items at the time of procurement;
- Geographical location of the municipality in comparison to proposed material sources.

Management response

Rates for some municipalities are harphazardly low, eg. Reinforced concrete

iii) Comparison of unit cost per square meter of works

A review was made of the unit cost per square metre of infrastructure for all SFG (and DDEG where applicable) projects in all the Municipalities and the lowest unit cost per square metre was identified. A comparison of Gulu project unit cost per square meter was made against the lowest unit cost per square metre among the Municipalities. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Cost per Square Meter of Building Works (F) (UGX)	Lowest Cost per Square Meter of Building Works Among Municipalities (Fm) (UGX)	Score (15*Fm/F)	Proportion of the Project Unit Cost to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)	
545,686	545,686	15.00	1.00	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.5.5 Assessment of Efficiency

The score on efficiency was 21 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Assessment of physical progress lag basing on initial work programme According to the signed contract, commencement date was on 11 th February 2018 and works were initially expected to achieve 100% completion by the end of June 2018. The actual commencement date, as indicated on IPCs was 13 th February 2018. No completion records were found on file, however, payment records revealed that the last payment was certified on 11 th June 2018. Therefore, there was no physical progress lag in the execution of this Project. ii) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on revised work programme As elaborated in (i) above, works were completed within the planned time and no revised programme was required.(a) Assessment of progress of works against timei)	N/AN/A	OkOk	OkOk	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed worksPresence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled upon completion of the contract. The same is required for an admeasure contract adopted for this project. Measurement sheets corresponding to the payment certificates were neither attached to the certificates nor availed to the auditors for verification. In the absence of these, the audit team could not ascertain whether the(i)	attention to proper project management and contract administration practices.Inadequate	of works exposes the Municipality to the risk of funds through overpayments to the contractor.loss ofNon-measurement	Accounting officer should ensure that detailed measurements are undertaken regularly during works progress for an admeasure contract, these detailed measurement sheets should be kept on file and attached payment certificates.to theThe	




145











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

Municipality undertook measurement of works during the process of certification. Non-measurement of works can lead to the risk of overpayments. (ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment certificate showed that the N/A Ok Ok payments were consistent with certified amounts.

(iii) Physical verifications to check any overpayments

The audit team undertook physical measurements of the Reluctance by the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were Municipality to compared to the quantities certified for payment in the payment conduct detailed certificate. The table below summarizes the quantities verified. measurements. Total amount of overpayment is UGX.5,432,600 equivalent to 8.2% of the certified amount. However, under payments were noted on some items.

Audit

Measurement

checks

Overpayments result The Accounting Officer should in financial loss to the ensure that the overpayment of Municipality. UGX.5,432,600 is recovered from the contractor.

Item No.	Description	Unit	Rate	Audit Quantity	Certified Quantity	Difference (Certified- Audit)	Overpayment	Remarks	
6(c )	Floor finish	SM	12,000	113.5	142.0	28.5	342,000		
8(d)	Ceiling mortar casting	SM	2,000	120.6	205.0	84.4	168,800		
8(e )	Ceiling plaster finish	SM	1,000	120.6	205.0	84.4	84,400		
4(g)	Gauge 28 roofing sheets	SM	17,000	175.8	178.0	2.2	37,400		
6(d)	External plaster	SM	8,000	114.2	78.0	(36.2)		Underpayment	
6(e )	Rough Cast finish	SM	8,000	71.5	52.0	(19.5)		Underpayment	
5(f)	Internal metallic door frame	No.	500,000	0	8	8	4,000,000		
5(i)	Internal doors 900x2100mm	No.	400,000	6	8	2	800,000		
Total							5,432,600		




Management Response

Our team is investigating this to verify. It it is true, recoveries shall be done from the contractor accordingly.

Audit Comment

To be followed up.

146











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program days

Finding					Cause Implication				Recommendation		
Ok(iv) Timeliness in Payments General Conditions of Contract require that payments shall be made by the Procuring and Disposing Entity, no later than 30 after submission and certification of a request for payment. Audit noted that payments by the Municipality were as detailed below. Assessment of the Municipality paid invoices submitted on time as per the signed contract. However, the contractor’s retention money has not been paid the project is still in DLP.the payment records revealed thatOk Ok											
Payment Records											
No.	Date requested	Amount	Date	Amount		Date Paid	Amount	Remark			
		requested	certified	certified			paid				
		(UGX)		(UGX)			(UGX)				
1 2 nd March 2018 22,101,080 5 th March 2018 21,213,680 6 th March 2018 19,940,859 No delays in payment											
27 th March 201814,900,00014,006,000 29 th March 2018 14,006,000 No delays in payment26 th March20182											
3 17 th April 2018 17,014,400 18 th April 2018 15,993,536 19 th April 2018 15,993,536 No delays in payment											
4 6 th June 2018 22,000,000 11 th June 2018 15,071,768 11 th June 2018 15,071,768 No delays in payment											
											
progress reports makes it difficult for the Municipality to make informed decisions regarding the implementation ofthat progress reports are prepared and filed on the contract management file. Comprehensive project completion reports should be prepared and filed.Preparation of progress reports by the of detailed Municipality should ensure Municipality supervised the works. No detailed progress reports were prepared. However, brief supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works. completion report was availed to the auditors. It was therefore considered unavailable.municipality to prepare project specific reports.Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring ArrangementsReluctance Absence The											




since .

..

(c)

(i)

The

No

147











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Management Response Supervision and monitoring reports were all on file and seen by Audit Comment Supervision reports (Not detailed progress reports) were seen but recommendation. (ii) Organisation of site meetings General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. No records of project specific site meetings were found.Management Response GMC shall be overstretched with too many meetings if we should function, general meeting is unavoidable. However, managementApproved supervising personnel on site Audit observed that the Assistant Municipal Engineer-Buildings was appointed the project manager. (iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of Audit, the works were completed therefore no equipment was on site.(iii)	We shall however inadequate quality asmunicipality explained that with many contracts running at the same time, separate meetings could not be organised.all site meetings per site. consider the bestTheOk	the projectimprove on the quality as already stated above.contractual matters cannot be discussed in general meetings.Remember these are to take.SomeOk	The reports should cover all project aspects including but not limited to physical and time progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions and summarised minutes of meetings.advised. reporting should be as per theMunicipality should avoid combining meetings of different contractors. specific meetings should be organised.Projectbut very many sites. To alow usTheOk	




auditors.

of Progress

small

will option

148











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program 3.5.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 11.2 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation

(a) Assessment of the quality of works under Quality control procedures Non-testing of The Accounting officer

implementation

could have been ignored. construction materials can should ensure that

(i) Material test results on file

Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results on file.

Management Response

result in the use of poor materials used for the quality materials works are tested to ultimately affecting the ensure conformance quality of the to quality infrastructure. requirements..

It is true, material tests were not on file for each SFG project. However, some material tests for aggregates and sand are on the road files as the sources are the same. Other things are, we use the manufacturers’ specifications eg. Reinforcement bars, cements, iron sheets. These are very sufficient for the local projects with limited funding for administrative cost.

Audit Comment

Manufacturer’s certificates were not seen. It is good practice to keep a complete project management file covering all project aspects. Material test results particular to each project should be part of the file since absence of these raises doubts regarding material tests for the project in question.

(ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings

The Accounting Officer

and physical specifications

Conformance to design for some items was checked by the Poor quality control

should always ensure Failure to meet the that works are executed auditors. The results are presented in the table below. procedures and lack of specified physical as per design drawings As shown in the table, non-conformity to specifications was attention to design observed on the doors and windows. However, details. documentation for these variations was not seen on the Contract Management File.

.Checks for Design Conformance

specifacations may lead to and physical the infrastructure failing specifications so as to to perform as intended. ensure that the completed infrastructure performs as intended

No.	Items	Specifications/ Drawings	Field checks/ measurements	Conformity	
1	External dimensions	16,668x7,690mm	17,000x7750mm	Ok	
2	Window size (No.)	1.2x1.2m (6No.)	1.18x1.38m (4No.)	Non-conforming	
3	Window size (No.)	1.2x1.5m (2No.)	1.33x1.5m (4No.)	Non-conforming	
4	Internal doors (No.)	900x2100mm (8No)	900x2380mm (6No)	Non-conforming	




. The table above shows that only one item out of the four items checked conformed to the physical specifications/drawings, representing 25% conformance

149











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
of Audit Test Results toIn-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.(iii) Conformance Specifications N/A N/A N/A				
(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defects The auditors inspected works on 9 th August 2018 in the presence of the Engineering Staff from Municipal Engineer’s Office of Gulu. The following were observed:				
Recently repaired cracks were observed on the floor running in different directions. However, the repair was poorly done as seen in the photo below.Poorly repaired cracks tend to re-appear which leads to wastage of resources in frequent repairs.Defects relating to the damaged floor rectifiedPoor curing of floor screed.Recently repaired defects in the internal floor				
Audit Comment No response given by the municipality.				
(b) Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure (i) Observed functionality and usage At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been occupied by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.N/A Ok Ok				
health and safety requirements and actions Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the billsenvironmental and social impactof non-compliance to - Environmental and environmental social screening should(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safety(i) Environmental and Social impact Safeguards, Inadequate Risk				




150











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file. Absence of detailed progress reports implies that there is no recorded evidence of implementation of measures to preserve the health and safety of the workers and the community at large.Management Response Audit finding was true, however, we captured environmental	monitoringgender issues well but little	requirements.on social impact.	be carried out. - Environmental and Social Management Plan should be prepared. - Monitoring of compliance to environmental and social impact safeguards should be done. - Measures to preserve the health and safety of the contractor’s workers and the community should be enforced by the project supervisor and should be reported about in progress reports.	




and

151











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.6

Project Title: Construction of a 5 Stance Toilet and Urinal at Mary Immaculate Primary School

The project was implemented by Gulu Municipal Council with funding from the Office of the Prime Mininster under the DDEG programme.

3.6.1 Contract Details The project details are presented in the following table.

Table 3.6-1: Contract Details

Implementing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	Discretionary Development Equalization Grant (DDEG)	
Works contractor	Agono General Enterprises	
Procurement Reference No.	Gulu 754/Wrks/2017-2018/00005	
Date of contract award	02 nd February, 2018	
Contract signing date	06 th February, 2018	
Commencement date	11 th February, 2018 ( As per signed contract, 5 days from date of signing of Contract)	
Actual commencement date	25 th March 2018	
Original contract period	No information given	
Initial date of completion	June, 2018	
Revised date of completion	N/A	
Actual Completion Date	17 th May 2018	
Contract amount	UGX 23,519,725= VAT inclusive	
Engineers estimate	UGX. 24,599,930=	
Actual value of work done	UGX. 23,519,725=	




3.6.2 Scope of Works The scope of the works included; Excavation, Construction of substructure, walling, roofing, plastering, painting, fittings, plumbing, and finishes.

3.6.3 Status of works at the time of audit At the time of audit, construction of the Five Stance toilet was completed though still

in the DLP and not in use.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.6.4 Assessment of Economy

The score on economy was 24.07 out of 30 as detailed below; (a) Assessment of the price difference between similar quality and quantity of works i)

Comparison of unit project item costs as per Engineer’s estimates

A review was made of the engineer’s estimates for all the SFG (and where applicable DDEG) projects in all the municipalities and the lowest engineer’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu’s engineer’s rates was made against the lowest engineer’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.6-2: Comparison of Engineers Estimates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Eng. Est. Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (1*Fm/F)	Percentage of Engineer’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	18,000	15,000	0.83	120%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	5,000	5,000	1.00	100%	
230mm walling	m 2	38,000	18,500	0.49	205%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	10,000	3,000	0.30	333%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	350,000	150,000	0.43	233%	
Total Score				3.05	Average = 198%	




The Municipality scored 3.05 out of 5. The engineer’s estimates were on average 98% times higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the local conditions and pricing of items at the time of estimation.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

lowest contractor’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.6-3: Comparison of Contractor’s Rates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Contract Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm/F)	Percentage of Contractor’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	5,500 1	20,000 2	2.00	100%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	9,500	5,000	1.05	190%	
230mm walling	m 2	32,000	10,000	0.63	320%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	6,500	4,000	1.23	163%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	360,000	200,000	1.11	180%	
Total Score				6.02	Average = 191%	




The Municipality scored 5.62 out of 10. The contractor’s rates were on average 91% higher than the lowest rates for the items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the following;

- Contractor’s pricing strategy;
- Prevailing market prices of items at the time of procurement;
- Geographical location of the municipality in comparison to proposed material sources.

iii) Comparison of unit cost per square meter of works

A review was made of the unit cost per square metre of infrastructure for all SFG (and DDEG where applicable) projects in all the Municipalities and the lowest unit cost per square metre was identified. A comparison of Gulu project unit cost per square meter was made against the lowest unit cost per square metre among the Municipalities. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Cost per Square Meter of Building Works (F) (UGX)	Lowest Cost per Square Meter of Building Works Among Municipalities (Fm) (UGX)	Score (15*Fm/F)	Proportion of the Project Unit Cost to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)	
586,886	586,886	15.00	1.00	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

The Municipality scored 15 out of 15. The project’s unit cost per square meter is the lowest unit cost per square meter of building works of similar scope across all the 18 municipalities.

Audit Comment

We concur with audit finding.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program 3.6.5 Assessment of Efficiency

The score on efficiency was 24 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(a) Assessment of progress of works against timei) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on initial work programme Works were planned to commence on 11 th February 2018 and were initially expected to achieve 100% completion by end of June, 2018. However, the actual commencement date, as indicated on IPC No.1 was 25 th March 2018 and the works achieved 100% completion on 17 th May 2018. Therefore, the project was completed in time and physical progress lag was 0%. ii) Assessment of physical progress lag basing on revised work programme As elaborated in (i) above, works were completed within the contract duration. Therefore, no revised programme was required.	OkN/A	OkOk	OkOk	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed worksPresence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled upon completion of the contract. The same is required for an admeasure contract as adopted this project. Measurement sheets corresponding the payment certificates were neither attached to the certificates nor availed to the auditors for verification. In the absence offor to(i)		of works exposes the Municipality to the risk of loss of funds through overpayments to the contractor.Non-measurement	thatAccounting officer should ensure the project manager takes measurements for works during execution. These should be signed by the project and contractor’s representative, kept on file and attached tomanagerThe	




156











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding					Cause		Implication			Recommendation			
3(a) Walling for superstructure 3(b) Walling of the curtain wall 4(c) Roofing timber (50x100mm Purlins) Roofing rafters) 4(e) Roof Cover (Gauge 28) 4(d) Wrot fascia boardM 2 M 2 MM 2 M22,500 32,000 5,5005,500 60004(b) timber (50x100mm M 6,500toManagement Response Noted. Some measurements were there. However, we shall (ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment certificate showed that the payments were consistent with certified amounts. (iii) Physical verifications check any overpayments The audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were compared to the quantities certified for payment in the payment certificate. The table below summarizes the quantities verified. The total amount of overpayment is UGX 549,500 equivalent to 2.7% of the certified amount Audit Measurement checks Item Description Unit Rate No.these, the audit team could not ascertain whether the Municipality undertook measurement of works during the process of certification.Item No.Description Unit Rate3(a) Walling for superstructure M 2 22,500 3(b) Walling of the curtain wallM 2 32,000 4(c) Roofing timber (50x100mm Purlins)M 5,5004(b) Roofing rafters)timber (50x100mm M 6,5004(e) Roof Cover (Gauge 28)M 2 5,500 4(d) Wrot fascia board M 6000					by the municipality to carryout field measure checks.improve.FailureN/A		result in financial loss to the Municipality.OkOverpayments			the payment certificates when prepared. Payment of full contract price without justification with detailed measurement is violation of the contract conditions for the admeasure contract.sheetsAccounting Officer should ensure that the overpayment of UGX.549,500 is recovered from the contractorOkThe			
					Audit QuantityAudit Quantity	Certified QuantityCertified Quantity		Diffrence (Audit- Certified)Diffrence (Audit- Certified)		Overpayment Overpayment	Remarks Remarks		
					50.8 50.8	43.5 43.5					Underpayment Underpayment		
					13.0 13.0	14.2 14.2					Ok Ok		
					18.7 18.7	28.0 28.0		9.3 9.3		51,150 51,150			
					12.8 12.8	35.0 35.0		22.2 22.2		144,300 144,300			
					17.0 17.0	43.0 43.0		26 26		143,000 143,000			
					17.7 17.7	42.0 42.0		24.3 24.3		145,800 145,800			




Item No.	Description	Unit	Rate	Audit Quantity	Certified Quantity	Diffrence (Audit- Certified)	Overpayment	Remarks		
3(a)	Walling for superstructure	M 2	22,500	50.8	43.5			Underpayment		
3(b)	Walling of the curtain wall	M 2	32,000	13.0	14.2			Ok		
4(c)	Roofing timber (50x100mm Purlins)	M	5,500	18.7	28.0	9.3	51,150			
4(b)	Roofingrafters)timber (50x100mm	M	6,500	12.8	35.0	22.2	144,300			
4(e)	Roof Cover (Gauge 28)	M 2	5,500	17.0	43.0	26	143,000			
4(d)	Wrot fascia board	M	6000	17.7	42.0	24.3	145,800			




157











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding Cause Implication Recommendation 6(d) Rough cast finish M 2 4500 30.5 45.0 14.5 65,250 6(g) Urinal room tiles M 2 6.6 5.0 (1.6) Underpayment

Total

549,500

Management Response

I concur with audit finding. We shall verify and make recovery from contractor accordingly. (iv) Timeliness in Payments General Conditions of Contract require that payments shall Ok Ok Ok be made by the Procuring and Disposing Entity, no later than 30 days after submission and certification of a request for payment. Audit noted that payments by the Municipality were as detailed below. Assessment of the payment records revealed that the Municipality was paying the invoices timely as per the signed contract.

Payment Details

No. Particulars Date Amount Date Amount Date Paid Amount Remarks requested requested certified certified paid (UGX) (UGX) (UGX)

1 IPC No.1 10 th May 2018 15,000,000 18 th May 20,100,715 2018 10 th May 2018 8,519,725 18 th May

22 nd May 2018 15,000,000 No delays in payment 22 nd May 5,100,715 No delays in 2018 2018 payment

(c) Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring

Arrangements

(i) Preparation of progress reports The Municipality supervised the works but no detailed Reluctance by the progress reports were prepared. However, brief supervision municipality to reports were found on file but with very little detail about prepare project progress of works. No completion report was availed to the specific reports. auditors. It was therefore considered unavailable.

158

The Municipality should ensure that progress reports Absence of detailed are prepared and filed on the progress reports contract management file. makes it difficult Comprehensive project for the Municipality completion reports should be to make informed prepared and filed. decisions regarding The reports should cover all the implementation project aspects including but of the project not limited to physical and











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Management Response Detailed monitoring and supervision reports were there on file. Audit Comment Supervision reports (Not detailed progress reports) were should be as per the recommendation. (ii) Organisation of site meetings General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors. No records of project specific site meetings were found on file.GMC shall be overstretched with too many meetings if we sites. To alow us function, general meeting is unavoidable.Each project has its own unique challenges that need to be own site meeting and respective site minutesResponse Comment(iii) Approved supervising personnel on site Audit observed that Assistant Engineer Buildings was appointed as the contract supervisor.ManagementAudit	he municipality explained that with many contracts running at the same time, separate meetings could not be organised.However we shall but of inadequateTall site meetings managementaddressed in a specificOk	the quality as quality as alreadycontractual matters cannot be discussed in general meetings.per site. Remember consider the bestsite meeting. AccodinglyOkSome	time progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions and summarised minutes of meetings.by audit team. above. Progress reportingMunicipality should avoid combining meetings of different contractors. Project specific meetings should be organised.these are small but very many to take.each project should have itsOkThe	




improve advised

seen stated

should However, will option

159











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(iv) Approved equipment on site At the time of Audit, the works were completed therefore no equipment was on site.				




3.6.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 18.2 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementationMaterial test results on file Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results. In absence of these, the audit could not ascertain whether the Municipality undertook material testing on the construction materials that were used. Management Response It is true, material tests were not on file for each SFG road files as the sources are the same. Other things cements, iron sheets. These are very sufficient for the local Audit Comment The management response was not accompanied by construction projects. Test results for aggregates were not may however present them for verification. It is good practice to keep a complete project management project should be part of the file since absence of these (ii) Conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications Some of the work items were checked by the audit team(i)	Quality control procedures could have been ignored.However, some we use the projects with limitedevidence in availed andfile covering all project doubts regardingPoor quality control	Non-testing of construction materials can result in the use of poor quality materials ultimately affecting the quality of the infrastructure.tests for specifications funding for administrativerespect to the material certificates wereaspects. Material test tests for theFailure to meet the	The Accounting officer should ensure that materials used for the works are tested to ensure conformance to quality requirements.and sand are on the eg. Reinforcement bars, cost.test results for building not seen. The municipalityresults particular to each in question.The Accounting Officer	




project. material aggregates are, manufacturers’

verifiable Manufacturer’s

raises material project

160











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding				Cause		Implication	Recommendation			
to ascertain conformance to design drawings and specifications. The results are presented in the table below. From the table, some items checked did not conform to the drawings and specifications.Drawings/External dimensions of the structure Height of screen wall Rafters Purlins Walkway Door shutters (No.) Urinal room Size of the septic tank1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 table above shows that 5 out of the 8 items checkedIn-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes. (iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of The auditors inspected works on 8 th August 2018 in the The following were observed: Poor floor screed finishing. Cement grout finish poorly done.conformance Management Response All the dimension here are well within the range, it is even (iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specificationshecks for Design Conformance No. ItemsCTheNo. Items Drawings/1 External dimensions of the structure 3 Height of screen wall 4 Rafters 5 Purlins 6 Walkway 7 Door shutters (No.) 8 Urinal room 9 Size of the septic tank				procedures and lack of attention to design details.		specified physical specifacations may lead to the infrastructure failing to perform as intended.	should always ensure that works are executed as per design drawings and physical specifications so as to ensure the completed infrastructure performs as intendedthat			
						checks/ measurementschecks/ measurements		Conformity Conformity		
				6700x3150mm 6700x3150mm		6650x3110mm 6650x3110mm		Ok Ok		
				2000mm 2000mm		1950mm 1950mm		Ok Ok		
				100x50mm 100x50mm		100x50mm 100x50mm		Ok Ok		
				75x50mm 75x50mm		75x50mm 75x50mm		Ok Ok		
				wide wide		1180mm 1180mm wide wide		No No conformity conformity		
				(5No.) (5No.)		830x2100mm 830x2100mm (5No.) (5No.)		No No conformity conformity		
				1500x1150mm 1500x1150mm		1070x1660mm 1070x1660mm		No No conformity conformity		
				6260x2460mm 6260x2460mm		6330x2470mm 6330x2470mm		Ok Ok		
				table above shows that 5 out of the 8 items checkedIn-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes. (iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of The auditors inspected works on 8 th August 2018 in the The following were observed: Poor floor screed finishing. Cement grout finish poorly done.conformance Management Response All the dimension here are well within the range, it is even (iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to SpecificationsThe				Staff from Premature wearing of the floor surface.are bigger than N/A	representing 63%Engineer’s Office Gulu. The cement grout finish should be re-done.on contract. N/A	




No.	Items	Drawings/ Specifications	Field checks/ measurements	Conformity	
1	External dimensions of the structure	6700x3150mm	6650x3110mm	Ok	
3	Height of screen wall	2000mm	1950mm	Ok	
4	Rafters	100x50mm	100x50mm	Ok	
5	Purlins	75x50mm	75x50mm	Ok	
6	Walkway	1000mm wide	1180mm wide	No conformity	
7	Door shutters (No.)	900x2100mm (5No.)	830x2100mm (5No.)	No conformity	
8	Urinal room	1500x1150mm	1070x1660mm	No conformity	
9	Size of the septic tank	6260x2460mm	6330x2470mm	Ok	




conformed to the physical specifications/drawings,

better since the dimensions stated

N/A

defects

presence of the Engineering Municipal

Laxity in supervision of

161











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
works. Rough floor finish				
(b) Assessment of infrastructurethe utilisation of the(i) Observed functionality and usage At the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been put to use by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, the facility is functional and ready for use.N/A Ok. Ok.				
environmental and social impact monitoring.of non- compliance to environmental and social impact mitigation requirements including health and safety.- Environmental and social screening should be carried out. - Environmental and Social Management Plan should be prepared. - Monitoring of compliance to environmental and social impact safeguards should be done. - Measures to preserve(c) Assessment of the fulfilment of environmental and social impact requirements, health and safetysocial screening wereEnvironmental and Social impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file. Absence of detailed progress reports implies that there is no recorded evidence of implementation of measures to preserve the health and safety of the workers and the community at large.found onInadequate Risk(i)				




162











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Management Response Audit finding was true, however, we captured environmental	and gender issues	but little on social	the health and safety of the contractor’s workers and the community should be enforced by the project supervisor and should be reported about in progress reports.	




well impact.

163











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.7

Project Title: Construction of a 5 Stance Water Borne Toilet at Laliya Primary School

The project was implemented by Gulu Municipal Council with funding from the Office of the Prime Mininster under the DDEG programme.

3.7.1 Contract Details The project details are presented in the following table.

Table 3.7-1: Contract Details

Implementing Agency	Gulu Municipal Council	
Funding	Discretionary Development Equalization Grant (DDEG)	
Works contractor	Acak Ki Kwene Construction and General Supply limited	
Procurement Reference No.	Gulu 754/Wrks/17-18/00006	
Date of contract award	02 nd February, 2018	
Contract signing date	06 th February, 2018	
Commencement date	11 th February, 2018 ( As per signed contract, 5 days from date of signing of Contract)	
Actual commencement date	No information	
Original contract period	4 months	
Initial date of completion	June, 2018	
Revised date of completion	N/A	
Actual Completion Date	No information	
Contract amount	UGX 22,938,860= VAT inclusive	
Engineers estimate	UGX 24,599,930=	
Actual value of work done	UGX 22,938,860=	




3.7.2 Scope of Works The scope of the works included; Excavation, Construction of substructure, walling, roofing, plastering, painting, fittings, plumbing, and finishes.

3.7.3 Status of works at the time of audit At the time of audit, construction of the five stance toilet was completed and in DLP.











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.7.4 Assessment of Economy

The score on economy was 22.74 out of 30 as detailed below; (a) Assessment of the price difference between similar quality and quantity of works

i) Comparison of unit project item costs as per Engineer’s estimates

A review was made of the engineer’s estimates for all the SFG (and where applicable DDEG) projects in all the municipalities and the lowest engineer’s rates for the 5 selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu’s engineer’s rates was made against the lowest engineer’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.7-2: Comparison of Engineers Estimates across Municipalities

Bill Item	Unit	Eng. Est. Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (1*Fm/F)	Percentage of Engineer’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F- Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	18,000	15,000	0.83	120%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	5,000	5,000	1.00	100%	
230mm walling	m 2	38,000	18,500	0.49	205%	
Roofing Timber 100×50mm	m	10,000	3,000	0.30	333%	
Reinforced Concrete	m 3	350,000	150,000	0.43	233%	
Total Score				3.05	Average = 198%	




The Municipality scored 3.05 out of 5. The engineer’s estimates were on average 98% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the local conditions and pricing of items at the time of estimation.

ii) Comparison of unit project item costs as per Works contracts

A review was made of contractors’ rates for all the SFG (and DDEG where applicable) projects in all the Municipalities and the lowest contractor’s rates for the selected items were identified. A comparison of Gulu contractor’s rates was made against the lowest contractor’s rates among the municipalities for the same selected items. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Bill Item	Unit	Contra ct Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm /F)	Percentage of Contractor’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)%	
Roofing Sheets (gauge 28)	m 2	20,000	20,000	2.00	100%	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Bill Item	Unit	Contra ct Rate (F) UGX	Lowest rate among municipalities (Fm) UGX	Score (2*Fm /F)	Percentage of Contractor’s Rate to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)%	
Internal Plaster	m 2	7,000	5,000	1.43	140%	
230mm walling	m 2	30,000	10,000	0.67	300%	
Roofing Timber 100×50m m	m	6,000	4,000	1.33	150%	
Reinforce d Concrete	m 3	340,000	200,000	1.18	170%	
Total Score				6.61	Average = 172%	




The Municipality scored 6.61 out of 10. Generally, the contractor’s rates were on average 72% higher than the lowest rates for the 5 items assessed across all the municipalities. This could be attributed to the following;

- Contractor’s pricing strategy;
- Prevailing market prices of items at the time of procurement;
- Geographical location of the municipality in comparison to proposed material sources.

iii)

Comparison of unit cost per square meter of works

A review was made of the unit cost per square metre of infrastructure for all SFG (and DDEG where applicable) projects in all the Municipalities and the lowest unit cost per square metre was identified. A comparison of Gulu project unit cost per square meter was made against the lowest unit cost per square metre among the Municipalities. The results of the assessment are presented in the table below;

Table 3.7-4: Comparison of Project Unit Costs

Cost per Square Meter of Building Works (F) (UGX)	Lowest Cost per Square Meter of Building Works Among Municipalities (Fm) (UGX)	Score (15*Fm/F)	Proportion of the Project Unit Cost to the Lowest (1+(F-Fm)/Fm)	
673,285	586,886	13.08	1.15	














Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

3.7.5 Assessment of Efficiency

The score on efficiency was 24 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
Assessment of physical progress lag basing on initial work programme According to the signed contract, works were to commence on 11 th February 2018 and were initially expected to achieve 100% completion by end of June, 2018. The commencement date indicated on IPC No.1 was 6 th February 2018, the day of contract signing. No formal project completion records were found on file, however the final payment was certified on 16 th April 2018. Therefore, the project was completed with in the contractual timelines, hence no physical progress lag.(a) Assessment of progress of works against timerevised work programme As elaborated in (i) above, works were completed within the contract duration. Therefore, no revised programme was required.ii) Assessment of physical progress lag basing oni)	N/AOk	OkOk	O k Ok	
(b) Assessment of the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed worksPresence of detailed measurement sheets Clause 17(4) of the PPDA (contracts) regulations 2014 requires that the actual work done is measured during the performance of a contract and is finally reconciled upon completion of the contract. The same is required under an admeasure contract adopted for this project. Measurement sheets corresponding to the payment certificates were neither attached to the certificates nor availed to the auditors for verification. In the absence of these, the audit team could not ascertain whether the Municipality undertook measurement of works during the process of certification. Non-measurement of works can lead to the risk of overpayments.(i)		of works exposes the Municipality to the risk of loss of funds through overpayments to the contractor..Non-measurement	Accounting officer should ensure that the project manager takes measurements for works during execution. These should be signed by the project manager and contractor’s representative, kept on file and attached to payment certificates when prepared.theThe	




167











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause			Implication		Recommendation			
(ii) Payment above certified amounts Audit review of the payment certificate showed that the payments were consistent with certified amounts. (iii) Physical verifications to check any overpayments The audit team undertook physical measurements of the quantities of some of the constructed works and these were compared to the quantities certified for payment in the payment certificate. The table below summarizes the quantities verified. Total amount of overpayment is UGX 1,029,200 equivalent to 5.5% of the certified amount Audit Measurement checks Item No.Description Unit Rate3(a) Walling for superstructure 3(b) Walling of the curtain wall 4(c) (50x100mm25,000 30,000 6,000timberRoofing timber Purlins) Roofing rafters) Roof Cover (Gauge 28) Fascia board Rough cast finish4(b)4(e) 4(d) 6(d)(50x100mm M 6000 11.7M 2 M 2 MM 2 M M 220,000 8,000 9,000 Total54.5 11.9 24.619.5 18.3 29.4. (iv) Timeliness in Payments General Conditions of Contract require that payments shall be made by the Procuring and Disposing Entity, no later than 30 days after submission and certification of a request for payment. Audit noted that payments by the Municipality were as detailed in the table below. The records reveal that the single payment was made on time.Item No.Description Unit Rate3(a) Walling for superstructure M 2 25,000 54.5 3(b) Walling of the curtain wallM 2 30,000 11.9 4(c) Roofing timber (50x100mm Purlins)M 6,000 24.64(b) Roofing timber rafters)(50x100mm M 6000 11.74(e) Roof Cover (Gauge 28)M 2 20,000 19.5 4(d) Fascia board M 8,000 18.3 6(d) Rough cast finishM 2 9,000 29.4 Total						by the municipality to carryout detailed measurements.N/AReluctance			result in financial loss to the Municipality.OkOverpayments		O kAccounting Officer should ensure that the overpayment of UGX.1,029,200 is recovered from the contractorThe			
							Certified QuantityCertified Quantity		Difference (Audit- Certified)Difference (Audit- Certified)	Overpayment Overpayment		Remarks Remarks		
							43.5 43.5		(11.0) (11.0)			Underpayment Underpayment		
							14.2 14.2		2.3 2.3	69,000 69,000				
							28.0 28.0		3.4 3.4	20,400 20,400				
							35.0 35.0		23.3 23.3	139,800 139,800				
							43.0 43.0		23.5 23.5	470,000 470,000				
							42.0 42.0		23.7 23.7	189,600 189,600				
							45.0 45.0		15.6 15.6	140,400 140,400				
						Total Total							
						. (iv) Timeliness in Payments General Conditions of Contract require that payments shall be made by the Procuring and Disposing Entity, no later than 30 days after submission and certification of a request for payment. Audit noted that payments by the Municipality were as detailed in the table below. The records reveal that the single payment was made on time.						Ok		




Item No.	Description	Unit	Rate	Audit Quantity	Certified Quantity	Difference (Audit- Certified)	Overpayment	Remarks	
3(a)	Walling for superstructure	M 2	25,000	54.5	43.5	(11.0)		Underpayment	
3(b)	Walling of the curtain wall	M 2	30,000	11.9	14.2	2.3	69,000		
4(c)	Roofing timber (50x100mm Purlins)	M	6,000	24.6	28.0	3.4	20,400		
4(b)	Roofing timberrafters)(50x100mm	M	6000	11.7	35.0	23.3	139,800		
4(e)	Roof Cover (Gauge 28)	M 2	20,000	19.5	43.0	23.5	470,000		
4(d)	Fascia board	M	8,000	18.3	42.0	23.7	189,600		
6(d)	Rough cast finish	M 2	9,000	29.4	45.0	15.6	140,400		
Total							1,029,200		




Ok O k

168











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding						Cause		Implication			Recommendation		
Payment Records No Particul arsDate requested Amount Date Paid Remark requested (UGX) 19,869,917Date certified Amount certified (UGX) 16 th April 2018 18,677,722Amount paid (UGX) 1 IPC No. 1 16 th April 2018 16 th April 18,677,722 No delays 2018													
													
													
Preparation of progress reports The Municipality supervised the works. Brief supervision reports were found on file but with very little detail about progress of works. No completion report was availed to the auditors. It was therefore considered unavailable.Review of Contract Supervision and Monitoring Arrangements(ii) Organisation of site meetings General meetings of all contractors of all SFG, DDEG and URF contractors were held by the municipality and minutes were availed to the Auditors.(c)(i)						by the municipality to prepare detailed progress reports.municipality explained that with many contracts running at the same time, separateReluctanceThe		of detailed progress reports makes it difficult for the Municipality to make informed decisions regarding the implementation of the projectcontractual matters cannot be discussed in general meetings.AbsenceSome			Municipality should ensure that progress reports are prepared and filed on the contract management file. Comprehensive project completion reports should be prepared and filed. The reports should cover all project aspects including but not limited to physical and time progress, quality control, financial details, personnel, equipment used, weather conditions and summarised minutes of meetings.Municipality should avoid combining meetings of different contractors. ProjectTheThe		




169











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(i) Approved supervising personnel on site Audit observed that Assistant Engineer Buildings was appointed as the contract supervisor.(iii) Approved equipment on site At the time of Audit, the works were completed therefore no equipment was on site.	meetings could not be organised.Ok	Ok	specificshould be organised.meetingsO k	




3.7.6 Assessment of Effectiveness

The score on effectiveness was 12 out of 35 as detailed below;

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
(a) Assessment of the quality of works under implementationMaterial test results on file Review of the contract management file showed that there were no material test results. In absence of these, the audit could not ascertain whether the Municipality undertook material the construction materials that were used. (ii) Conformance of site works to designtesting onSome of the work items were checked by the audit team to ascertain conformance to design drawings and specifications. The results are presented in the table below. From the table, some items checked did not conform to the drawings and specifications.drawings and physical specifications(i)	Quality control procedures could have been ignored.there is a possibility that implementation of site works as per design drawings was overlooked. As well as project managed and quality control.Being a small project,	Non-testing of construction materials can result in the use of poor quality materials ultimately affecting the quality of the infrastructure.controlling quality of works as well as avoiding poor workmanship and unnecessary variations.D ifficulties in	 The Accounting officer should ensure that materials used for the works are tested to ensure conformance to quality requirements.ofMunicipality issuingshould ensure the contractor with drawings so as to implement proper designs; and copies of these should be put on the contract management file.The	




170











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program C

Finding			Cause	Implication	Recommendation			
hecks for Design Conformance								
No.	Items	Drawings/ Specifications Field checks/ measurements				Conformity		
3 Height of screen wall 2000mm 1750mm Non conformity								
4 Rafters 100x50mm 100x50mm Ok								
5 Purlins 75x50mm 75x50mm Ok								
6 Walkway 1000mm wide 1000mm wide Ok								
7 Door shutters (No.) 900x2100mm (5No.) 840x1820mm (5No.) Non conformity								
8 Urinal size 1500x1150mm 1720x1080mms Non conformity								
9 Size of the septic tank 6260x2460mm 6280x2450mm Ok								
table above shows that 4 out of the 8 items checked conformed to the physical specifications/drawings, representing 57% conformance								
In-situ concrete tests could not be carried out on the structure since all concrete elements were already overlaid with cement-sand mortar finishes.(iii) Conformance of Audit Test Results to Specifications N/A N/A N/A								
(iv) Physical inspection to ascertain presence of defects auditors inspected works on 8 th August 2018 in the presence of the Engineering Staff from Municipal Engineer’s Office Gulu. The following were observed:								
floor finish. The floor was not finished smooth. Laxity in supervision of works.Premature wearing of the floor surface.The floor finish should be made smooth with cement grout.								
Assessment of the utilisation of the infrastructure Observed functionality and usage the time of audit, works were complete, but the facility had not yet been put to use by the intended beneficiaries. Basing on the physical inspections, theN/A Ok. Ok.								




The

The Poor

(b) (i)

At

171











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

Finding	Cause	Implication	Recommendation	
of impactAssessment of the fulfilment environmental social requirements, health and safetyand(i) Environmental and Social impact Safeguards, health and safety requirements and actions Environmental impact mitigation was provided for in the bills of quantities. However, no records of environmental and social screening were found on file. The Environmental and Social Management Plan was also not prepared. No records of monitoring of environmental and social impact mitigation measures were found on file. Absence of detailed progress reports implies that there is no recorded evidence of implementation of measures to preserve the health and safety of the workers and the community at large.facility is functional and ready for use.(c)	environmental and social impact monitoring.Inadequate	of non- compliance to environmental and social impact mitigation requirements including health and safety.Risk	- Environmental and social screening should be carried out. - Environmental and Social Management Plan should be prepared. - Monitoring of compliance to environmental and social impact safeguards should be done. - Measures to preserve the health and safety of the contractor’s workers and the community should be enforced by the project supervisor and should be reported about in progress reports.	




172











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

APPENDIX 1: PROJECT SCORE CARD

ASSESSMENT TOOL CRITERIA: GULU MUNICIPALITY 2017/2018					PROJECT SCORE							
No	Objective	Sub-Objective	Parameters	Criteria	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	
					USMID	URF	SFG	SFG	DDEG	DDEF	DDEG	
1	To assess the unit cost of delivery of the infrastructure against works of similar nature (Economy) Max points - 30	To assess the price differences between similar quality and quantity of works (30 Marks)	Unit project item costs as per Engineer’s Estimates. (5 Marks)		4.67	4.95	2.27	3.05	2.27	3.05	3.05	
			Unit project item costs as per signed Contracts (10 Marks)		10.00	9.75	6.87	5.87	5.87	6.02	6.61	
			Unit cost per square meter of road/building works among the municipalities (15 Marks).		13.73	4.36	13.61	13.84	15	15	13.08	
TOTAL ECONOMY					28.40	19.06	22.75	22.76	23.14	24.07	22.74	
2	To assess the level of implementation of the works against the agreed contract approved work programs and outputs (Efficiency)	To assess the progress of the works against time (10 Marks)	Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from initial work program and actual physical progress) (5 Marks)	Physical lag ≤ 5% - 5mks; >5% - ≤ 10% - 4mks; >10% - ≤ 20% -3mks; >20% - ≤ 25% - 2mks; >25% - ≤ 30% -1mk; above 30% - 0mks	2.00	0	5	5	5	5	5	




173











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

	Max points - 35		Physical progress lag – (difference between the planned as derived from the current approved revised work program and actual physical progress) (5 Marks)	Physical lag ≤ 5% - 5mks; >5% - ≤ 10% - 4mks; >10% - ≤ 20% -3mks; >20% - ≤ 25% - 2mks; >25% - ≤ 30% -1mk; above 30% - 0mks	5	0	5	5	5	5	5	
To assess the existence and effectiveness of internal controls for certification and payment of executed works (18 Marks)		Presence of detailed measurement sheets (2 Marks)	Detailed measurement sheets present – 2mks; Absent – 0mks	2	0	0	0	0	0	0	
		Payment above certified amounts (IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices etc.) (3 Marks)	No payment above certified amount – 3mks; Any payment above certified amount -0mks	3	3	3	3	3	3	3	
		% of overpayment (as a result of variance between audit values and certified works) to the certified value of the works (10 Marks)	0% overpayment - 10mks; 1% - ≤5% - 5mks; 6 - ≤10% - 2mks; above 10% - 0mks	5	5	2	5	2	5	5	
		Timeliness in payment of IPCs, fee notes, material supply invoices	Payment within contractual provision – 3mks; Otherwise	0	3	3	3	3	3	3	




174











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

	etc. (3 Marks)	– 0mks								
To Review contract Supervision and monitoring arrangements (7 Marks)	% of quality progress reports prepared (2 Marks)	100% reports – 2mks; otherwise - 0mks	2	0	0	0	0	0	0	
	Presence of Minutes of Site Meetings (2 Marks)	Minutes of site meetings present –2mks; Otherwise - 0	2	0	0	0	0	0	0	
	% of approved supervising personnel on site (2 Marks)	100% personnel – 2mks; otherwise - 0mk	2	2	2	2	2	2	2	
	% of approved equipment on site (1 Mark)	100% equipment – 1mk; otherwise - 0mk	1	0	1	1	1	1	1	
TOTAL EFFECIENCY					24	13	21	24	21	24	24	
3	To assess the usage and quality of the infrastructural works undertaken by the municipalities (effectiveness) Max points - 35	To assess the quality of works under implementation (25 Marks)	Material test results on file (5 Marks)	Material test results present – 5; Absent - 0	5	0	0	0	0	0	0	
			% conformance of site works to design drawings and physical specifications (7 Marks)	100% conformance – 7mks; 99% - ≥80% - 3mks; 79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk	1	0	0	7	0	1	0	
			% conformance of audit test results to specifications (10 Marks)	100% conformance – 10mks; 99% - ≥80% - 5mks;	0	10	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	




175











Value for Money Audit/assessment of the Municipalities participating in the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development - Additional Funding (USMID-AF) program

	79% - ≥60% - 1mk; less than 60% - 0mk								
Presence of defects from visual observations (3 Marks)	No defects observed – 3; Minor defects observed – 2; Major defects observed - 0	2	2	2	3	0	2	2	
To assess the utilization of the infrastructure (10 Marks)	Observed Functionality and Usage (10 Marks)	Functioning and used as intended – 10mks; below – pro-rata basing on team judgement	10	10	10	10	8	10	10	
TOTAL EFFECTIVENESS					18	22	16.8	28	11.2	18.2	12	
TOTAL SCORE					70.4	54.06	60.55	74.76	55.34	66.27	58.74	




176











