THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE UGANDA ROAD FUND

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE 2019

OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL UGANDA











TABLE OF CONTENTS
Opinion - 1
Basis of Opinion - 1
Key Audit Matters - 1
  1.0 Implementation of the approved budget - 1
Emphasis of Matter - 4
  2.0 Failure to disclose contingent liabilities (court cases) - 4
Other Matters - 5
  3.0 Corporate governance - 5
Other Information - 7
Management Responsibilities for the Financial Statements - 8
Auditor General’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements - 8
Other Reporting Responsibilities - 9
Report on the Audit of Compliance with Legislation - 9
  4.0 Transfers to other Organizations (Designated Agencies) - 9
  5.0 Government staff performance Management Initiatives - 12
  6.0 Construction of PPDA/ URF Office Building - 13
  7.0 Special Audit report conducted at the Uganda Road Fund during the year - 14











REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF

UGANDA ROAD FUND FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2019

THE RT. HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

Opinion

I have audited the accompanying financial statements of Uganda Road Fund for the year ending 30 th June 2019. These financial statements comprise the Statement of Financial Position as at 30 th June 2019, the Statement of Financial Performance, Statement of Changes in Equity and Statement of Cash Flows for the period then ended, accompanying schedules and a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory notes.

In my opinion, the financial statements of Uganda Road Fund for the year ended 30 th June 2019 are prepared, in all material respects, in accordance with section 51 of the Public Finance Management, 2015 and the Financial Reporting Guide, 2018.

Basis of Opinion I conducted my audit in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs). My responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Uganda Road Fund in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) as amended, the National Audit Act, 2008, the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) Code of Ethics, the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (Parts A and B) (IESBA Code), and other independence requirements applicable to performing audits of Financial Statements in Uganda. I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA Code, and in accordance with other ethical requirements applicable to performing audits in Uganda.

I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Key Audit Matters Key audit matters are those matters that, in my professional judgment, were of most significance in my audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of my audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming my opinion thereon, and I do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. I have determined the matters described below to be key audit matters communicated in my report.

1.0

Implementation of the approved budget

Section 45 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015, requires the Accounting Officer to control the regularity and proper use of the money appropriated to the vote. According to Section 45 (3) of the same Act, the Accounting Officer shall enter into an annual performance contract with the Secretary to Treasury which shall bind the Accounting Officer to deliver on the activities in the work plan for the vote for the financial year. Work plans are based on outputs to be achieved for the financial year, and during implementation, effort is required to achieve the agreed objectives/targets for the entity within the available resources. It has been observed over the years that planned activities of a number of Government entities are not implemented thereby affecting service delivery. In the overall office wide planning, I assessed risks of budget shortfalls and low funds absorption that is likely to be the causes of failure to implement entity planned











activities. The focus was put on the planned outputs of the entities which greatly impact on the wellbeing of communities. Consequently, I developed procedures in order to address the performance of the budget of the entity, which included:

- Ascertaining the amount received by the entity and the source of the funding
- Inquiring from management of off-budget financing received and ascertaining the basis for the off-budget financing, if any.
- Comparing the approved budget against the actual receipts
- Comparing the planned vote function outputs against the actuals and determining the variances
- Reviewing utilisation of the funds.

Based on the procedures performed, I observed the Uganda Road Fund has a constitutional mandate to finance the routine and periodic maintenance of public roads in Uganda and to ensure that public roads are maintained at all times. In addition, the Fund advises the Minister responsible for roads and the Minister responsible for Local Governments on the preparation and effective implementation of the Annual Road Maintenance Programme and the control of overloading of vehicles on public roads.

In order to achieve this mandate, URF had an approved budget of UGX 542,517,023,289 earmarked for URF secretariat operations and financing of road maintenance activities of various Designated Agencies (DAs Out of this budget, UGX 540,966,204,691 was released, leading to a budget shortfall of UGX 1,550,818,598 (representing 0.3%).

The Fund planned to implement and achieve a number of both recurrent and development outputs under the various programmes. The key findings on the implementation of the entity budget are summarized in the table below, and details are given in Appendix 1 to this report.

No	Observations	Recommendations	
1.1	Revenue Performance Section 15(1) of the Public Finance and Management Act (PFMA) 2015 states that after approval of the annual budget by Parliament, the Secretary to Treasury shall issue the annual cash flow plan of Government, based on the procurement plans, work plans and recruitment plans approved by Parliament. Section 15(2) of the PFMA states that the annual cash flow plan issued under subsection (1) shall be the basis for release of funds by the Accountant General to the Accounting Officers. Further, Section 15 (3) requires that an Accounting Officer shall commit the budget of a vote, based on the annual cash flow plan issued under this section. A review of the entity’ revenue performance revealed the following:  The entity had a budget appropriation of UGX 542,517,023,289 during the year. However, UGX 540,966,204,691 was warranted resulting in a budget shortfall of UGX 1,550,818,598 (representing 0.3%).  Out of the amount warranted of UGX. 540,966,204,691, UGX. 540,956,699,691 was spent by the entity resulting in unspent balance of UGX 9,505,000 representing an absorption level of 99.9% The unspent balance at the end of the financial year was subsequently swept back to the Consolidated Fund account.	I advised the Accounting Officer to liaise with MoFPED to ensure the budgeted funds are fully released, to enable the Fund to implement its planned activities.	














	The budget shortfall of UGX.1,550,818.598 affected the implementation of activities.explained that the major shortfall was on the capital expenditure budget for construction of the URF/PPDA House.Management		
1.2	Implementation of planned activities In order to achieve its mandate, the entity planned to implement and achieve a number of both recurrent and development outputs under various programmes and projects.the review of the URF performance reports for the year, it was noted that most of the major outputs relating to road maintenance that were reported as achieved were not supported with adequate evidence. For example, it was difficult to trace the kilometrage maintained across the country through the information system and the supporting records.further observed that some of the planned activities were not achieved, for example; out of the 10 fixed and 10 mobile weigh bridges that were to be operated, only 8 fixed and 4 mobile weigh bridges were operated.of planned activities affects the achievement of the Road Fund objectives. Further, due to inadequate supporting evidence, the information reported in the performance reports may not be relied on.attributed the anomaly to limited staffing to cover all designated agencies, and that the Fund plans to utilize consultants to undertake some of these assignments so as to adequately verify the submitted information.IFromNon-implementationManagement	The Accounting Officer should ensure that the information provided in the performance reports is properly collected, recorded, analysed, summarized and validated to ensure accuracy and completeness.also advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that all planned activities are implemented.I	
1.3	Mischarge of expenditure Regulation 16(1) of the Public Finance and Management Regulations, 2016, requires an Accounting Officer to request the Minister for approval to vary, within a vote, the amount of money allocated to the vote. Paragraph 10.4.1 (step 4) of the Treasury Instructions 2017 requires that in reviewing payment requests, an Accounting Officer shall have a primary responsibility of ensuring that there is no mischarge and diversion of funds through wrong coding of transactions. The Treasury Instructions further state that an Accounting Officer shall be held personally liable for any wrong charge on accounts used for expenditure incurred by his or her vote.the contrary, it was observed that during the year under review, a sum of UGX 320,570,436 was charged on items that do not reflect the nature of the expenditure as defined under Government Chart of Accounts as shown in Appendix II. There was no evidence that authority was sought from the Minister for the budget variations. Mischarge of expenditure is an indication of Management override of the established budgetary and commitment control procedures. It impacts on the credibility of the budget and accuracy and completeness of the financial statements since the figures reported therein do not reflectOn	processAccounting Officer should streamline the budget to ensure that sufficient funds are allocated to each account and budget controls are fully adhered to such as seeking authority for any reallocations.The	














the actual amounts expended. Also, planned activities remain unexecuted as funds are diverted elsewhere.explained that the Performance Budgeting System (PBS), the tool used in planning advocates for activity-based budgeting which calls for a task being broken down and costed under activities. This brings a challenge during execution where narratives to an activity automatically qualify as a mischarge. However, going forward Management indicated that they will ensure that all expenditure lines are well budgeted and budget control is adhered to.Management								
Inaccurate performance reports I noted cases where the information reported in the annual performance reports by the Fund Management was either incomplete or inconsistent with the disclosures made in the financial statements. The cases are reflected below:  Under output 045272 Government buildings and administrative infrastructure where the Fund got only UGX.4,700,000,000 UGX.6,000,000,000 budgeted for the office block, there was no reason given for variance.out of Released and actual figures disclosed in the statement of appropriation were not tallying with figures disclosed in the performance report as shown below:Amounts disclosed byFinancial statements Performance reportApproved estimates (UGX) Million 542.52Released Amount (UGX) Million 540.96Spent Amount of Million540.66 542.52 541.19 541.10Inconsistencies in the performance reports indicate the absence of a proper mechanism for validation of management in misleading information to the users of the financial statements.information. This resultsindicated the reconciliation process will be further enhanced to avoid discrepancies.that moving forward1.4Management							The Accounting Officer should put in place a mechanism for proper validation of performance data reported in the various management reports.	
								
								
								
								
								




Emphasis of Matter Without qualifying my opinion, I draw attention to the following matter related to disclosure in the financial statements that, in my judgement, is of such importance and fundamental to users’ understanding of the financial statements.

2.0

Failure to disclose contingent liabilities (court cases)

Paragraph 19.3.2 (g) Treasury Instructions 2017 states that a complete set of Financial Statements shall be accompanied by a summary of contingent liabilities. Contrary to the above I noted that the Fund did not prepare a summary of its ongoing court cases that could potentially result in contingent liabilities. For instance, I observed that the Fund has an ongoing lawsuit, Milton Mumanye Vs Uganda Road Fund (H.C.C.S No. 5 of 2014), in which the plaintiff, represented by M/s Alliance Advocates sued the Fund for general damages for unlawful termination of employment. The matter is pending in the Industrial Court awaiting a hearing











date, to be fixed by the Plaintiff. This matter has not been disclosed by Management in the financial statements. The omission results in a misstatement of the contingent liabilities and this may not allow the URF to adequately plan for the consequent cash outflows. The Accounting Officer explained that URF has a case (Milton Mumanye Vs Uganda Road Fund (H.C.C.S No. 5 of 2014), in the industrial court as stated, and it was to be disclosed as guided. I advised the Accounting Officer to always ensure that all contingent liabilities are disclosed in the financial statements in accordance with the requirements of the Treasury Instructions.

Other Matters

In addition to the matters raised above, I consider it necessary to communicate the following matters other than those presented or disclosed in the financial statements.

3.0 Corporate governance

There was a lack of cohesion within the Board as a result of the deterioration in the working relationship between the Executive Director and the Board chairperson on one hand and the Chairperson and URF Staff on the other. This created an unfavourable corporate governance environment that negatively affected the operations of the Road Fund. The following were observed in relation to corporate governance:

No	Observations	Recommendations	
3.1	Inharmonious relationship between the Board Chairperson and the Executive Director There was animosity between the Executive Director (ED) and the Chairperson which led to a deterioration in the working relationship between the Executive Director and the Board Chairperson. The animosity between the ED and the Chairperson has been demonstrated in instances such as Several accusations and counter accusations between the Executive director and the Chairperson, and; Board members walking out of several meetings as a result of disagreements between the ED and the Chairperson.	The Board should review the Board Charter with a view of developing or enhancing procedures for resolution of conflicts that may arise between the Board and Management.	
3.2	Unsigned Board minutes As a result of animosity, Board minutes for the 76 th , 77 th , 78 th , 79 th , 80 th , 81 st , 82 nd, and 85 th meetings have not been approved and signed due to disagreements on the content. The failure to agree on the form and content of the minutes meant that the other resolutions agreed in those meetings could not be approved as well. Examples of such resolutions include the review of the funds allocation formula, approval of the Annual Budget for Financial Year 2017/18, Approval of the Annual Report FY 2017/18, a performance review of the strategic and business plans, establishment of a dedicated research development unit to handle issues related to input of data, and consideration of monthly reports.	I advised the Board to ensure that a meeting is arranged for approval and signing of the long outstanding sets of board minutes.	
3.3	Functionality of Board Committees Board Committees that were established in FY 2011/12 included the Finance and Administration Board Committee (FABC), Board Audit Risk, Monitoring and Evaluation Committee (BARMEC), and the Policy and Strategy Board Committee (PSBC). During the period under review (1 st July 2016 to 31 st December 2018), the various committees met 26 times. Details of the committee meetings are in the table below.	The Appointing Authority should develop and implement appropriate procedures for regularly evaluating the performance of the Board, its committees and the Executive	














	committee meetings 2016/17 (six CommitteeFABC 3 6 BARC/ BARMEC PSBC 5 142017/18 2018/19 months) 3 0 0 34 5 0 9the Board manual does not specify how often Board committees should convene, from the review of the board minutes and interviews held with the various Board members, it was noted that since the financial year 2016/17 there was a general decline in the frequency of the Board committee meetings which was attributed to the breakdown in primary Board operations. From the table above, it is noted that the frequency of BARC/BARMEC and PSBC meetings declined significantly to the extent of failing to meet in the first half of 2018/19. In particular, I noted that three BARMEC reports and one PSBC report that was scheduled for presentation to the full Board in April 2018 remained pending on the Board agenda until 23 rd November 2018 because of the impasse at the Board level.BoardWhile						Director. Sanctions for poor performance should be clearly spelt out and applied where necessary. Appointments/renewal of Road Fund Management and Board members should be based on satisfactory performance with performance criteria.line the approvedin	
Committee								
FABC								
BARC/ BARMEC								
PSBC								
								
the Board manual does not specify how often Board committees should convene, from the review of the board minutes and interviews held with the various Board members, it was noted that since the financial year 2016/17 there was a general decline in the frequency of the Board committee meetings which was attributed to the breakdown in primary Board operations. From the table above, it is noted that the frequency of BARC/BARMEC and PSBC meetings declined significantly to the extent of failing to meet in the first half of 2018/19. In particular, I noted that three BARMEC reports and one PSBC report that was scheduled for presentation to the full Board in April 2018 remained pending on the Board agenda until 23 rd November 2018 because of the impasse at the Board level.While								
3.4	Internal Audit reports Section 49 (5-e) of the PFM Act states that the Audit Committee shall consider the reports submitted by the Internal Auditor to the accounting officer and make recommendations on the findings of the internal auditor. However, a review of internal audit reports and discussion with internal audit revealed that the Audit Committee did not sit for the whole year, and therefore the Internal Audit reports for quarters 1, 2, 3 and 4 were not discussed by the Committee. This undermines the oversight function of the Audit Committee as timely recommendations are not provided to Management for action.							
3.5	Relationship amongst Board members There was existence of a hostile environment and disharmony amongst Board members. There were Board members that did not get along and conflicts were common. Board meetings were filled with disagreements, use of strong words, Board members storming out of meetings prematurely and instances where members would heckle at each other during submissions. The conduct of Board members during Board meetings could explain the failure by the Board to handle the committee business as most of the committee reports were not discussed particularly during the period 2017/18 and 2018/19.						I advised the current Board members to address the conflicts within the Board, and devise of collaborative work methods, to foster the achievement of URF objectives.ways	
3.6	Inharmonious relationship between the Board and staff There was an inharmonious relationship between the Board and staff. In a letter dated 27 th November 2018, the staff of Uganda Road Fund petitioned the Minister over gross mismanagement and abysmal corporate governance of Uganda Road Fund by the Chairperson of the Board. They specifically mentioned the Chairperson such as direct interference with recruitment and Board Committee operations, direct intervention withthat the interventions of						I advised the Board to review the Board Charter with a view of developing or enhancing procedures for resolution of conflicts that may arise between the Board and Management.	














	road maintenance fund allocations among others were creating nugatory expenditure at the Fund and affecting the Fund's ability to achieve its performance outputs and successful delivery of road maintenance programs which are central to URF core functions. Other significant issues mentioned in the staff petition included: unsigned Board minutes for one (1) year which had crippled the operations of the Road Fund Secretariat which is detrimental to road maintenance programs; inappropriate conduct of Board meetings and abuse of power, and; direct interference with procurements of the Fund and frustrating Road Fund projects.		
3.7	Board evaluation The Board adopted an Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda (ICGU) tool for Board evaluation. However, further inquiries revealed that this tool has not been applied. There was no evidence to show that the Board as an organ, its members and the various committees have been appraised since the Board came into existence. Without a proper annual assessment of the Board, the gaps and weaknesses in the Board operations could not be properly identified and corrective action is taken to improve the performance of the Board.	The Appointing Authority should develop and implement appropriate procedures for regularly evaluating the performance of the Board, its committees and the Executive Director.	
3.8	Lack of regulations for operationalization of the URF Act Section 49 of the URF Act 2008 provides for the formulation of the Regulations to operationalize the provisions of the Act. However, whereas the URF Act came into force on 3rd October 2008, by the time of writing this report, the URF Regulations were not in place to operationalize the Act. Management indicated that on 20th October 2015, a draft copy of the Regulations was submitted to the Minister for authorization and gazetting. Furthermore, a follow-up reminder was made on 11th July 2017 during a Board meeting with the Minister and it was agreed that the Regulations would be gazetted and a status report given to the Minister. To date, no action has been taken. As a stop gap measure, the Fund has formulated manuals and guidelines to guide its operations. In absence of Regulations, URF has lacked guidance on various matters critical to its governance, administrative and financial operations. Management acknowledged the observation and explained that they have undertaken efforts to follow up with the responsible authorities.	The Accounting Officer to liaise with the Appointing Authority to ensure that the URF Regulations are gazetted as prescribed under the Act.	




Other Information

The Accounting Officer is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the statement of responsibilities of the Accounting Officer and the commentaries by the Head of Accounts and the Accounting Officer and other supplementary information. The other information does not include the financial statements and my auditors’ report thereon. My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially consistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work I have performed, I conclude that











there is a material misstatement of this other information; I am required to report that fact. I have nothing to report in this regard.

Management Responsibilities for the Financial Statements

The Accounting Officer is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in accordance with Public Finance Management Act 2015, and the Financial Reporting Guide, 2018, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatements, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, the Accounting Officer is responsible for assessing the funds’ ability to continue as a Going Concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting, unless the Fund’s management either intends to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.

The Accounting Officer is responsible for overseeing the Fund’s financial reporting process.

Auditor General’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements

My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISSAIs will always detect a material misstatement, when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users, taken on the basis of these financial statements. As part of an audit in accordance with ISSAIs, I exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. I also:-

- Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
- Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Funds’ internal control.
- Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the management.
- Conclude on the appropriateness of the Accounting Officer’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Fund’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Fund to cease to continue as a going concern.
- Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. I communicate with the Accounting Officer regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.











I also provide the Accounting Officer with a statement that I have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on my independence, and where applicable, related safeguards. From the matters communicated with the Accounting Officer, I determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. I describe these matters in my auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, I determine that a matter should not be communicated in my report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.

Other Reporting Responsibilities In accordance with Section 19 (1) of the National Audit Act, 2008, I report to you, based on my work described on the audit of Financial Statements, that; except for the matters raised in compliance with legislation section below, and whose effect has been considered in forming my opinion on the financial statements, the activities, financial transactions and information reflected in the financial statements that have come to my notice during the audit, are in all material respects, in compliance with the authorities which govern them.

Report on the Audit of Compliance with Legislation

The material findings in respect of the compliance criteria for the applicable subject matters are as follows;

4.0

Transfers to other Organizations (Designated Agencies)

In accordance with Section 6 of the URF Act, the object of the Fund is: (a) to finance the routine and periodic maintenance of public roads in Uganda; (b) to ensure that public roads are maintained at all times. I observed that during the year, the Fund transferred UGX 527,260,418,605 to other organizations (agencies) to cater for road maintenance activities in line with this mandate. However, I observed several inconsistencies in relation to this role, as described below:

4.1

Unclear criteria used in the allocation of funds to Agencies

Section 22 (2) of the URF Act, 2008, (as amended) states that allocations from the Fund to the designated agencies shall be based among other factors, on the conditions of the public roads, maintenance requirements, the length of the road network and the relevant volume of traffic, or derived from an approved maintenance management tool. There was no evidence that the criteria used for allocation of funds to the Agencies take into account the conditions of the public roads, maintenance requirements, the length of the road network and the relevant volume of traffic, or is derived from an approved maintenance management tool as required by the URF Act. The allocation of funds for road maintenance is not undertaken in accordance with the URF Act. This poses a risk of allocations being undertaken in an unfair and inequitable manner. Management explained that the current URF allocation formula which has been in use since FY 2014/15 conforms to the URF Act 2008 and takes into account the parameters listed in Section 22 (2) therein. The allocation formula uses a three-stage process of allocating funds including; the surface types, road network types and finally to the designated agencies. However, the challenge has been obtaining an updated database of roads on which to base the criteria to suitably allocate the funds.











I advised the Accounting Officer to obtain an up-to-date road database and review the allocation criteria in order to conform to the requirements of the Act.

4.2

Release of emergency funds to Agencies

The Committee summary paper for special works budget allocation by FBAC dated 18 th April 2013 defines special works as those works whose frequency cannot accurately be determined with any certainty in advance and they include works such as emergency and social benefit works. The same paper defines an emergency as an unanticipated and unforeseeable need for maintenance works that has suddenly arisen as a result of an act of nature or civil commotion in respect of which urgent redress is required. Furthermore, the Board Planning, Policy and Strategy Committee meeting paper on Network management for Special intervention/Emergencies dated 6th September 2016 defines an emergency as an occurrence arising from an “Act of God” and that “Act of God” should not be as a result of “shoddy” work.

Paragraph 7.0 (f) of the URF Network Management Paper on the need for special works budget allocation (special intervention/emergency funding) requires that applicants for emergencies and verification visits should involve District Roads Committees. In addition, Paragraph 7.0 (e) of the same document requires the URF team to be accompanied by the relevant District/Municipality Engineer for the District urban and community access roads (DUCAR) network and some members of District Roads Committee while undertaking verification visits on emergency sites. A review of emergency funds application revealed that UGX 35,620,000,000 was requested for the emergency amount by the District/ Municipal Councils. The table below refers to:

Quarter	Total Funding Requests (UGX)	
1	6,500,000,000	
2	8,500,000,000	
3	14,210,000,000	
4	6,410,000,000	
Total	35,620,000,000	




A review of documentation on emergency funds revealed the following:

- Inadequacy of Emergency fund releases The review of the URF road (interventions) ledgers revealed that out of UGX 35,620,000,000 requested, only UGX 3,565,833,979 was remitted to various districts and urban councils as emergency funding for road maintenance as shown in Appendix 4. Therefore, the funds released were not sufficient to cover the emergency requests.

- Untimely releases It was also observed that the releases are not timely. It takes on average four quarters (one year) and approximately three releases for URF to partly or completely fund an emergency request.

The inadequate and untimely releases negatively impact on the implementation of emergency projects. The Accounting Officer explained that due to budgetary constraints, the current allocation of UGX 3.6bn (equivalent to only 0.6% of the budget) is inadequate to completely address the emergency funding requirements on the DUCAR network. The Accounting Officer further explained that the Fund is currently engaging MoFPED for an increment in the allocations for road maintenance. Additionally, agencies have











also been advised to make programme reviews to their annual road maintenance work plans to handle some of the emergencies on the network.

I advised the Accounting Officer to undertake a review of the financing and implementation of emergency activities to ensure that the mechanisms in place achieve the desired impact.

4.3 Non-involvement of the Board in approval of the allocations of Emergency/Special intervention works

Section 2.4 of the Board manual states that in order to ensure the performance of their role, members of the Board shall have complete access to the funds management information. Furthermore, Section 9.1 of the Board manual states that the responsibility for the financial affairs of the Fund shall at all times be the responsibility of the Board members both individually and collectively. The Board shall exercise this responsibility by approving the financial policies and budgets of the Fund. It was established that with regard to emergency/special interventions, the involvement of the Board in the approval of the emergency/special interventions stops at the approval stage of the annual budget of URF. The Board is not involved in the approval process of the monthly/quarterly allocations of emergency funds to local Governments. This can result in mistrust between the Board and Management of URF. The Accounting Officer explained that the Board is involved in the approval of the annual budget which includes funding for emergency maintenance works. Additionally, the Board is appraised of the quarterly releases made to the designated agencies which include emergency funding. However, going forward, the Secretariat will involve the Board in the approval process prior to release of emergency funds to the designated agencies.

I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that the process of fund allocation for emergency purposes is made more transparent by involving the Board in the approval process.

4.4 Lack of a Public Road network database and system

URF does not have an updated Public road network database that would form the basis of all road fund activities across the country. Such a database should ideally give a snapshot of the actual conditions of all roads in the country which would form the basis of funding all road maintenance activities and if regularly updated, the road database would also aid the URF to differentiate between the roads due for maintenance and roads that actually qualify for emergencies arising from the topography and weather patterns of a given area.

The failure to maintain an up to date Public Road network database coupled with the failure of URF, DRCs or Councils to carry out real-time inspections puts the release of all Road Fund activities including the emergency funds at risk of not being applied for the intended purpose. From explanations given by Management, it was indicated that the Public roads database is a responsibility of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

The Accounting Officer explained that URF will continue engaging MoWT to have in place an updated road network database for all designated agencies. In addition, URF requested, all designated agencies to submit their road and bridge inventory and condition survey as part of their FY 2018/19 annual work plans. The Accounting Officer further explained that currently, the Monitoring and Evaluation Department is











the process of setting up a database of the entire agency road network which will be functional by end of quarter three of 2019/2020. I advised the URF Management to engage the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure that a comprehensive Road network database is in place to provide a basis for all road maintenance activities across the country.

4.5 Monitoring of emergency fund activities

Paragraph 7.0 (f) of the URF Network Management Paper that analyses the need for special intervention/emergency funding requires that all applications made for emergencies by designated agencies to be supported with verification visits that involve district roads committees. Also, Paragraph 7.0 (e) of the same document requires the URF team to be accompanied by the relevant District/Municipality engineer for the DUCAR network and some members of the District Roads Committee while undertaking verification visits on emergency sites.

However, the following matters were observed;

- Inadequate monitoring and evaluation of emergency sites by URF

Management

There is inadequate monitoring and evaluation of emergency fund activities by URF Management. This is attributed to limited staff numbers to carry out this role.

• Inadequate monitoring by Council and District Road Committees

(DRCs) The monitoring by the Councils and District Committees was also observed to be inadequate. The District Road Committees were not actively undertaking inspections of the road projects.

The monitoring of emergency/special interventions is inadequate. This may lead to the use of emergency funds towards activities that were not planned. The Accounting Officer explained that the recommendation to carry out a complete evaluation will be brought to the attention of the Board. However, in order to address the challenge of understaffing at the Secretariat, the Secretariat plans to utilize consultants to augment the efforts of the few staff in the Monitoring and Evaluation department to adequately handle monitoring of utilization of the road maintenance funds including emergency funds. The Accounting Officer further explained that in addition, during FY 2018/19, the Policy and Strategy department of the Fund undertook field visits in 40 District Local Governments aimed at sensitizing members of the District Road Committees on their oversight roles regarding utilization of road maintenance funds. An additional 40 DLGs are planned to be covered during FY 2019/20 I advised the Board should carry out a comprehensive evaluation of its staffing structure with a view of expanding it to adequately cover its mandate. I also advised the Accounting Officer to carry out further sensitization sessions of the District Road Committees in order to give them clear guidance on their roles and responsibilities in monitoring road maintenance activities.

5.0 Government staff performance Management Initiatives 5.1 Completion of performance improvement plans

Section 7.1 of the URF Human Resource Policy 2018 requires each of the employees to sit with their line managers at the beginning of the appraisal period to set performance targets, come up with a performance plan and professional development programmes for each employee. It is from these development











programmes that the human resource directorate plans for training each of the staff should undertake in the next period. I noted that performance improvement plans (development programmes) were not completed for all staff. I was availed with a copy of the URF Consolidated Staff Annual Training Plan 2018/2019 and 2019/2020 but not an annual performance improvement plan. Without performance improvement plans, URF may not develop appropriate interventions needed to address weaknesses in the individual staff performance. It may also result in URF undertaking staff training programmes in an adhoc manner. The Accounting Officer explained that for the financial year 2018/19, the annual performance improvement plan is in place and is being implemented as per the URF training plan for the FY18/19 and 19/20. I advised the Accounting Officer that as part of the appraisal process, Management should ensure that every year, annual staff performance improvement plans are put in place, which will facilitate the choice of training to be carried out.

5.2 Non - existence of Rewards and Sanctions Committee

Section 12.12 of the URF Human Resource Policy 2018 requires the Fund to put in place a Rewards and Sanctions Committee to listen to any form of enquiries, investigations or allegations that may be brought out to the Fund. The Committee allows managers to reward excellent performance, and also reprimand poor performance. The Committee should be chosen by the Executive Director and approved by the Board.

I noted that URF does not have a Rewards and Sanctions Committee.

Absence of the Committee implies that inquiries or investigations may not be addressed in an appropriate manner. In addition, excellent performers will not be recognized and rewarded as required by the policy.

The Accounting Officer explained that URF is in the process of formulating a recognition policy to put in place guidelines for reward recognition. For the Sanctions Committee, the URF has a Disciplinary Committee in place and there are grievances and disciplinary procedures in the newly approved Human Resource Manual.

I advised the Accounting Officer to put in place the Rewards and Sanctions committee to operationalize the requirements of the policy.

6.0 Construction of PPDA/ URF Office Building -Inequitable Payments to the

contractors by the two parties On 17 th October 2017, Uganda Road Fund (URF) and Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) jointly entered into a contract with Seyani Brothers & Co. (U) Ltd and Parbat Siyani Construction Ltd Joint Venture for the construction of PPDA-URF office building at a contract sum of UGX 47,233,427,266 tax inclusive. Further to the above construction contract, on 17 th October 2017, the two Agencies jointly entered into another contract with M/s Symbion Uganda Ltd the provision of consultancy services for construction supervision at a contract price of 2,796,283,760. Under paragraph 2 of the joint development agreement between URF and PPDA, the parties agreed to equally contribute funds in equal proportion to finance the project. A review of the construction ledgers as of 8/10/2019 revealed that the two agencies had already contributed a total sum of UGX 18,350,384,116 for both the consultant and the contractor. However, the contributions were found not to be in equal











proportion as agreed by the two agencies. URF had so far contributed only UGX 6,951,244,883 while PPDA had contributed a total of UGX 11,399,139,233 as shown in the table below.

Entity	Contrition to the construction contractor (UGX)	to consultantContribution the (UGX)	Total contribution UGX)	
URF	6,358,636,909	592,607,974	6,951,244,883	
PPDA	10,416,893,082	982,246,151	11,399,139,233	
Totals	16,775,529,991	1,574,854,125	18,350,384,116	




This poses a risk of delayed payments to the contractor. It may also breed misunderstanding between PPDA and URF.

The Accounting Officer explained that during the financial year 2018/19 URF was allocated UGX 6 bn for the project and PPDA was allocated UGX 10.4 Bn. This created inequality in budgetary provisions with certificates being paid in proportion to budgetary allocation between the two entities. For FY2020/21 URF has increased the budgetary provision to UGX 15.8 bn to address this inequality.

I advised the Accounting Officer that URF should endeavor to contribute in a timely manner the right portion towards the construction of the office block.

7.0

Special Audit of the operations of the Uganda Road Fund during the year

The Head of the State House Anti-Corruption and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requested the Office to undertake a special audit into the operations of Uganda Road Fund, with particular attention to the following issues: (i) The state of corporate governance at URF, and in particular the implementation of Board resolutions. (ii) Procurement of office premises by URF Management. (iii) Advances of operational funds to staff accounts irregularly. (iii) Utilisation of emergency funds.

In accordance with Sections 13(3) and 22 of the National Audit Act, 2008, I instituted the special audit into the operations of the Fund. The main objective was to investigate the specific allegations raised above and make a report of my findings to the responsible authorities. A separate audit report on the special audit was issued to the relevant authorities.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

KAMPALA 30 th December 2019











Appendix 1: Implementation of Planned Outputs Vote Planned Amount Actual Audit Audit Remarks Function outputs (Billions) Outputs-as Remarks- per Achievem

Performan ent of

ce Report planned

045251 Street lighting National on 50km Road Maintenanc e 10 fixed and 10 mobile weighbridges to be

outputs Achieved The output was street achieved. Street lighting of lighting on 50km was 50km installed. Partially The output was Achieved partially achieved. 2 weighbridges out of 8 fixed and 10 were fixed and 4 operated 4 mobile mobile weighbridges weigh out of 10 were fixed. bridges However, whereas these had been fixed they were not in operation. 337 bridges Unable to I was unable to Routine confirm confirm the output. mechanized It was difficult to Maintenance maintenance verify the outputs as of there were no 337No. Budget:31 monitoring reports bridges 2.56 presented to support Released: the reported 312.5 performance. Routine Spent: Routine Unable to I was unable to mechanized 312.5 mechanized confirm confirm the output. maintenance paved of 1,762km No reports were 1,762km and presented in support paved and unpaved of the performance 10,185km 10,185km of unpaved National Roads roads. financed 13 ferries operations

Partially The output was Achieved partially achieved. Financing of 9 ferries and operations and Financed maintenance maintenance was maintenanc completed. e and operation of URF did not finance 9 ferries the maintenance and operation of 4 ferries. Reports were

045252 Installation of District, 6,456 culvert

also not present. Installation Partially The activity was of 5,781 Achieved partially completed.











Urban and Community Access Road Maintenanc e	lines	214.73 Release: 214.84 Spent:214 .69Budget:	Culvert lines		5,106installed.culverts	
	Routine Manual Maintenance of 23,581 km of unpaved roads		Routine manual maintenanc e of 26,264 km	Unable to confirm	thatthe performance report indicates it performed more than expected, there were no monitoring reports to support the reported achievement.I was unable confirm the output.toWhereas	
	Periodic maintenance of 6.66 km paved city roads		Periodic maintenanc e on 4.84km of paved KCCA	AchievedPartially	The partially achieved.output wasof the 6.66km planned for paved KCCA, 4.84km were maintained.1.82km were not maintained as planned.OutThe	
	Routine Maintenance 453.10 KCCA unpaved roadskm		Routine Maintenance 305 km unpaved KCCA roads	Unable to confirm	I was unable confirm the output.towere no monitoring reports to support this performance as stated by the entity.There	
	2,300kmPeriodic maintenance of on paved/unpave d Municipal Council Roads		periodic maintenanc e of 2,280.82km of Municipal roads	Unable to confirm	I was unable confirm the output.tono monitoring reports from which these km were derived and therefore rendering the achievement doubtful.There	
	Routine mechanized maintenance of 12,779km of District roads		Routine Mechanized maintenanc e of 12,779km of district roads	Unable to confirm	I was unable confirm the output.tono monitoring supporting achievementreports the reported.There	
045272 Government	25%URF/PPDAof	Budget: 6.00	Construction of basement	Partially Achieved	The construction of the basement and	














Buildings office premise Release: and ground ground floor was and constructed 4.70 floor completed. Administrati Spent: 4.7 completed ve Infrastructu re

Source: OAG Analysis

However, the 25% was not defined as to what it entails as much as funds were budgeted and released.











APPENDIX 2: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS











