THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA RAILWAYS CORPORATION

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE 2020











TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Acronym - 2
Qualified Opinion - 3
Basis for Qualified Opinion - 3
  1.0 Unsupported loans from foreign Government – UGX 16,511,595,000 - 3
  2.0 Interest payable on equipment loans – UGX 9,511,880,000 - 3
  3.0 Unsupported sundry creditors – UGX 13,046,317,386 - 4
  4.0 Unsupported trade receivables – UGX 11,217,376,390 - 4
Key Audit Matter - 5
  5.0 Implementation of the approved budget - 5
Emphasis of Matter - 9
  6.0 Non Impairment of assets - 10
  7.0 Long outstanding Withholding Tax receivable - UGX 1,005,358,000 - 10
  8.0 Unauthorized excess expenditures - UGX 4,432,928,474 - 10
Other Matters - 11
  9.0 Lack of Land titles - UGX 91,832,636,500 - 11
  10.0 Encroachment on Uganda Railways Corporation land - 11
11.0 Management of Meter Gauge Equipment - Missing exhibits from vandalism of Meter
Gauge Equipment - 11
Other Information - 12
Directors Responsibilities for the Financial Statements - 13
Auditor General’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements - 13
Other Reporting Responsibilities - 14
Report on the Audit of Compliance with Legislation - 14
  12.0 Management of Government Vehicles (Fleet Management) - 14
  13.0 Human Resource and Employee Costs - 18
  14.0 Unclear cooperation with the Uganda Railway Police - 20
15.0 Procurement - Awarding of contracts to suppliers who failed to meet qualification
criteria - UGX 2,088,434,541 - 21











LIST OF ACRONYM

Acronym	Meaning	
BOD	Board of Directors	
FY Financial year		
IFRS	International financial reporting standards	
IAS International accounting standard		
IT	Information Technology	
PPE Property Plant and Equipment’s		
MOU	Memorandum of Understanding	
UGX Uganda Shillings		
URC	Uganda Railways Corporation	
KRC	Kenya Railways Corporation	
RVR Rift Valley Railways		
PAYE	Pay as You Earn	
NSSF	National Social Security Fund	
PERD Act	Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act	
VAT	Value Added Tax	
WHT Withholding tax		














REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA RAILWAYS CORPORATION

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE 2020

THE RT. HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT Qualified Opinion

I have audited the accompanying financial statements of Uganda Railways Corporation which comprise the statement of Financial Position as of 30 th June 2020, and the Statement of Comprehensive Income, Statement of Changes in Equity and Statement of Cash Flows together with other accompanying statements for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, except for the possible effect of the matters described in the Basis for Qualified Opinion section of my report, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Uganda Railways Corporation as of 30 th June 2020 and the results of its operations and cash flows for the period then ended, in accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards and the Uganda Corporation Act, Cap 331 of the Laws of Uganda.

Basis for Qualified Opinion

1.0

Unsupported loans from foreign Government – UGX 16,511,595,000

The Corporation had loans from foreign Governments amounting to UGX.16,511,595,000. The loans comprised of borrowed funds or funds mobilized by the Government of Uganda from various multilateral and bi-lateral funding agencies for onward lending to the Corporation. However, these loans were not supported and did not show any movement over the last four (4) years. In absence of documentation to support the reflected outstanding amounts, I was unable to establish whether the outstanding amounts were fairly stated. There is a risk of misstatement of the loan balances and accounts.

Management explained that the equipment was sourced and bought by GOU and given to URC for which subsequent on-lending agreements were not availed apart from the Spanish Loan. In addition, GOU paid off the foreign donors and URC has not received any demand notes over the years. URC has continued to request supporting documents from GOU, these have not been availed. URC will follow up with the Accountant General to convert these debts into Equity.











The Accounting Officer explained that this relates to interest accumulated on Equipment Loans stated in paragraph 1 above (also in Note 19 of the Financial Statements). The equipment was sourced and bought by GOU and given to URC for which subsequent on-lending agreements were not availed apart from the Spanish Loan. It is understood that GOU paid off the foreign donors. URC has not received any demand notes over the years. The Accounting Officer further explained that whereas URC continued to request for supporting documents from GOU (MoFPED), these have not been availed. The Accounting Officer added that over the recent years and to-date, URC started requesting GOU to convert these dates into Equity for which no response has been received.

I advised the Accounting Officer to follow up with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that the right obligations on the loans are ascertained and correctly recorded in the financial statements.

3.0

Unsupported sundry creditors – UGX 13,046,317,386

Management reported trade and other payables of UGX.24,573,058,000 of which UGX.9,753,781,407 (approximately 40% of the trade and other payables) were sundry/other creditors that lacked supporting documents such as LPOs, Contracts, Inward Invoices, claims, demand notes. In absence of supporting documentation, the existence, completeness, and accuracy of related transactions could not be confirmed. The Corporation is at risk of paying non-existent payables.

The Accounting Officer explained that these will be included in the request to Board for write-off. I also advised the Accounting Officer to follow the laid down procedures for the write-off of the creditors’ balances in case they are not properly supported.

4.0

Unsupported trade receivables – UGX 11,217,376,390

Management reported trade and other receivables of UGX.17,714,154,000 of which UGX.11,217,376,390 (62%) lacked supporting documents such as tenancy agreements, concession agreements, invoices. In absence of supporting documentation, the existence, completeness, and accuracy, of related transactions could not be confirmed. There is a risk of overstating the trade receivables thereby impairing the fair presentation of the statement of financial position.











Key Audit Matter

Key audit matters are those matters that, in my professional judgment, were of most significance in my audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of my audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming my opinion thereon, and I do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. In addition to the matters described in the Basis for Qualified for Opinion paragraphs, I have determined the matters described below to be key audit matters communicated in my report.

5.0

Implementation of the approved budget

Every year, Government plans and allocates funds to Public Sector entities for the implementation of activities that would enable the country to attain sustainable development. I observed that Government entities have challenges in implementing planned and budgeted for outputs/activities, which affects service delivery. As a result, the implementation of the approved budget was considered a key audit matter during the office-wide planning.

I assessed risks such as inadequate revenue performance, failure to implement planned outputs, failure to undertake budget monitoring and supervision among others which were likely to result in poor performance of the budget.

In accordance with the Uganda Corporation Act, Cap. 331 of the laws of Uganda, the overall objective of Uganda Railways Corporation is to undertake the construction of railway, marine and road services both inside and outside Uganda for the carriage of goods and passengers. In addition, the Corporation is mandated to carry out, subject to the Act, any such activities that are conducive or incidental to the attainment of its main objective.

To achieve this mandate, the URC planned to implement a number of both recurrent and development deliverables under various departments. For the year under review, the Corporation had an approved revenue budget of UGX.100.38 Bn of which UGX.14.8 Bn was realized as revenue.

From the procedures undertaken, the following was noted:

No	Observation	Recommendation	
5.1	Implementation of the strategic planoverall Government National Development Plan (NDP II) expired at the end of FY 2019/20. In line with the NDP II, the URC had an approved strategic plan for the period 2016/2017 -2020/21, which set out both the long term and short term targets to be achieved during the duration of the strategic plan. This being the 2 nd last year of implementation of the URC’s strategic plan, I undertook an assessment of the achievement of the Corporations’ strategic targets/goals.noted that at the time of the audit (June 2020), out of the planned five (5) strategic targets/goals, no target had been fully achieved; all the five (5) were partially achieved as summarized in Table 5 below.IThe	advised the Accounting Officer to devise a strategy of increasing the passenger train coaches, goods routes, and also engage the business community for increased carriage.I	














Table 5: Extent of achievement of 2016/2017-2020/2021 strategic planNo Level of performance by the end of 2019/2020No of strategic goals/ objectives% of total number of strategic objectives1 23Fully achieved Partially achieved Not achievedTotal0 05 00510000 100Accounting Officer explained that the underperformance was due to the business community perception about railway transport which is worsened by the poor state of the Meter Gauge rail network, rampant vandalism of rail-slippers which result into delayed deliveries, train accidents, high levels of obsolete and dilapidated machinery and buildings respectively that are not generating revenue.addition, the COVID-19 pandemic lock downs halted the passenger city service train for over 8 months (March– November 2020). The overall effect was low internally generated revenue. The trend was worsened by the failure to timely absorb the meagre Central Government support to URC. These combined led to low revenue realization which continued to impair the Corporation’s ability to meet its differed maintenance projection of its assets so as to raise enough revenue to fully support its operations.TheIn								
								
								
								
								
								
								
5.2 Revenue Performance of NTRreviewed the NTR estimates, revenue sources and rates charged at the entity for the financial year 2019/2020 and noted that the entity budgeted to collect NTR of UGX.100.38BN during the year under review. Out of this, only UGX. 14.8 Bn was collected, representing a performance of 14.7% of the target.of GoU receiptsentity budgeted to receive UGX.53.5 Bn out of which a total of UGX.7.8 Bn was warranted, resulting in a shortfall of UGX. 45.7 Bn which is 85% of the budget. Revenue shortfalls affect the implementation of planned activities.Accounting Officer explained that the underperformance was due to accidents caused by the poor state of the meter-gauge railway line in both Kenya and Uganda which costed the Corporation an estimated USD.700,000 in revenue and the Covid 19 pandemic which led to a lockdown between Mid-March to early November 2020. This paralyzed transport further contributing to about 38,000 MT in lost revenue, and; encroachment/theft of assets, among others.IPerformancePerformance TheThe							KRCadvised the Accounting Officer to continue liaising with in undertaking preventive maintenance on the rail and increase the security of URC assets to curb theft and encroachment.also advised the Accounting officer to engage GOU (MoFPED) for increased funding.II	
								
								
								
14.1.16 of the URC Financial Accounts Manual, 2007 provides that activities not catered for in the budget shall require a special approval by the Management Committee and the Board.of the total receipts for the financial year of UGX.22.99 Bn, UGX.34.945.3 Absorption of funds ParagraphOut							I advised the Accounting Officer to adhere to the budget provisions and deliver planned outputs as planned.	
								














	Bn was incurred by the Corporation resulting into an excess expenditure of UGX.12 Bn representing an absorption level of 152%. Refer to Table 6 below;6: Absorption of fundsYear 2019/20 APP EST (A) (UGX billions)(B)RECEIP TS (UGX billions) 22.6stifle its operations.Expenditure (C) billions)(UGXExcess (B-C) (UGX billions)% absorption34.94 (12) 152.4% 153.9 resulted in the accumulation of domestic arrears which will furtherAccounting Officer explained that this was mainly due to the commitment system derived from the accrual accounting system, and credit facilities derived from the Corporation’s account payables thus leading to accumulation of domestic arrears/payables.TableThisThe							I also advised the Accounting Officer to engage GOU (MoFPED) for increased Government funding support.	
Year 2019/20									
APP EST (A) (UGX billions)									
153.9									
stifle its operations.resulted in the accumulation of domestic arrears which will furtherAccounting Officer explained that this was mainly due to the commitment system derived from the accrual accounting system, and credit facilities derived from the Corporation’s account payables thus leading to accumulation of domestic arrears/payables.ThisThe									
5.4	Quantification of outputs55 of the budget execution circular for the financial year 2019/2020 states that the Accounting Officer is required to submit quarterly performance reports by the 30 th day of the first month of the next quarter. These reports should indicate the actual performance against the planned outputs and performance for each quarter, showing the quantity/quality and physical location of the reported outputs against expenditure.of the ten (10) outputs with a total of thirty-five (35) activities and expenditure of UGX.9.3 Bn sampled for assessment, I reviewed the extent of quantification of outputs and activities and noted the following;Five (5) outputs with a total of eighteen (18) activities and expenditure worth UGX.0.507 Bn were fully quantified. That is, all the eighteen (18) activities (100%) within these outputs were clearly quantified to enable assessment of performance. Three (3) outputs with a total of fifteen (15) activities and expenditure worth UGX.8.84 Bn were insufficiently quantified. I observed that out of the fifteen (15) activities, eight (8) activities (53.3%) were quantified while seven (7) activities (46.7%) were not clearly quantified to enable assessment of performance. Two (2) outputs with a total of two (2) activities were not quantified at all. That is, all the two (2) activities within these outputs were not clearly quantified to enable assessment of performance.to Table 7 below for a summary of extent of quantification and amounts spent.Paragraph OutRefer							I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that there is sufficient quantification of all outputs and their activities to enable efficient monitoring and budget performance assessment.further advised the Accounting Officer to equip the Planning Unit with the necessary human resources to enable it undertake proper planning.I	














Table 7: Extent of Quantification by activitiesSummary of Performance by Outputs Activity details-AnalysisCategory of outputsFully quantified outputsInsufficiently quantified outputsOutputs not quantified% of total out- puts samp ledExpe nditu re UGX Bn% propo rtion to total expe nditu reNo. of out put s sa mpl ed5 50 0.507 5.4 18 18Total no of activi ties in the outp utsNo. of Fully Quan tified activi tiesNo. of activiti es not fully quantif ied% of quantificat ion of activities per category of output3 30 8.83 94.5 15 82 20 0 0 2 00 72100 53 0 Total 10 100 9.34 100 35 26 9observed that in cases where outputs were either partially or not quantified, management reported performance in generic ways such as boundary markers erected without specifying the number of boundary markers erected.to plan and report on the quality/quantity of activities implemented renders it difficult to establish the reasonableness of individual activity costs for each planned output which curtails effective accountability when funds are subsequently spent. Further, without clearly and fully quantified outputs, I could not ascertain the level of achievement of these outputs and whether funds appropriated by both URC Board, Minister, and Parliament (for Government support) released to the Corporation were spent appropriately and the intended objectives achieved.explained that this was due to planning and budgeting gaps within the Corporation. The Planning Unit is in its infancy stage and inadequately staffed.I FailureManagement													
													
													
													
													
													
													
													
5.5 Implementation of quantified outputsassessed the implementation of Five (5) outputs that were fully quantified with a total of eighteen (18) activities worth UGX 0.507Bn and noted the following;The entity did not fully implement any output over the FY 2019/2020.One (1) output with a total of two (2) activities worth UGX 0.507Bn was partially implemented. The entity implemented both activities partially.Four (4) outputs with a total of sixteen (16) activities worth were not implemented at all. That is the entity did not implement all the sixteen (16) activities (0%) within the outputs.to Table 8 for a summary of the extent of implementation and amounts spent.I Refer												I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that internally generated revenue is accurately budgeted for and followed up for collection and to follow up with the relevant authorities to adequate GOU funding support.	
													














Extent of implem entatio n of activiti es per categor y of output0 008 Showing level of implementation of Fully QuantifiedTotal no of activi ties% propo rtion to total expe nditu reNo. of Fully imple ment ed activit iesNo. Of parti ally impl eme nted activ itiesNo. of activi ties that were not imple ment edExpendi ture UGX% of impl eme ntati onNo of outp utsSummary of Performance by Output Activity details-AnalysisoutputsCategory of output0 0 020 0.507 700200020 060 0 0 16 0 0 160 14Fully implement ed outputs Partially Implemen ted outputs Outputs Not Implemen ted Total 5 100 0.507 70 18 0 2 16Non-implementation of planned activities implies that the expected services to the beneficiary communities were not attained. For example, the entity did not procure 2 pool vehicles, one tipper, two mini buses, and did not erect a fence over Kampala headquarter land, among others. Details in Appendix II.Accounting Officer explained that failure to implement all planned activities and outputs fully was due to the Covid 19 pandemic lockdown effect and low realization of funds both internal and GoU support.BnTableThe													
													
													
													
													
													
													
													
5.6 Accuracy of Performance reports submitted55 of the budget execution circular for the financial year 2019/2020 states that the Accounting Officer is required to submit quarterly performance reports by the 30 th day of the first month of the following quarter. These reports should clearly indicate the actual performance against the planned outputs and performance for each quarter, showing the quantity/quality and physical location of the reported outputs against expenditure.my review of the annual cumulative performance reports and physical inspections/verification of performance, I noted that whereas departments prepared quarterly performance reports, and annual performance report prepared by the Corporation, most of the planned outputs were reported on in generic form. This made proper assessment of performance difficult. No explanation was given for this anomaly.ParagraphFrom												I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that all planned outputs are accurately reported on in the annual performance report to enable effective assessment of budget performance.	
													














6.0

Non Impairment of assets

Management did not assess the impairment of assets despite the existence of impairment indicators. For instance, rental properties were being charged below market value where some tenants were paying UGX.5,000 per month for rentable houses. In addition, the revaluation and assessment report dated April 2018 indicated a number of assets such as cranes, civil engineering equipment, wagons and locomotives that were physically damaged and required major repairs, overhaul and decommissioning, thus emphasizing the need for impairment.

Non- recognition of impairment loss overstates non–current assets and understates expenditure.

The Accounting Officer explained that this exercise was started and a Board of Survey was also set up during the year 2019/2020. He further explained that this exercise progressed slowly because of the pandemic; this will be completed in the year 2020/21.

I advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that all the non-current assets are assessed and presented at the correct carrying values.

7.0

Long outstanding Withholding Tax receivable - UGX 1,005,358,000

Under Note 12 to the Statement of Financial Position as of 30 June, 2020 is a Withholding Tax (WHT) receivable of UGX.1,005,358,000 under trade and other receivables as an amount relating to withholding tax recovered by other companies on transactions undertaken with URC. Whereas URC has tax certificates and evidence of application for a refund of these taxes submitted to URA, the amount still remains outstanding with no correspondences from the tax body.

This raises uncertainty on the recovery of the funds in question.

The Accounting Officer explained that a refund was applied for and the tax audit is on-going

I advised the Accounting Officer to follow up with URA to formalize the claim and ensure that the claimable WHT refund is paid.











Other Matters

In addition to the matters raised above, I consider it necessary to communicate the following matters other than those presented or disclosed in the financial statements;

9.0

Lack of Land titles - UGX 91,832,636,500

Uganda Railways Corporation land worth UGX.91,832,636,500 lacked land titles as evidence of URC’s rights to own and use the property. Management’s efforts to secure the land titles appear remote. Lack of land titles for the land exposes the Corporation to the risks of land encroachment and grabbing.

The Accounting Officer explained that Management is pursuing the titling of land in various locations. Regarding Nalukolongo Workshop land worth UGX.75,113,745,000, the Accounting Officer explained that Management sought the intervention and assistance of the Solicitor General’s office to help them acquire title to the land on which the workshop and its ancillary developments are situated.

I advised the Accounting Officer to expedite the processes of the transfer and processing of the titles for the land in question.

10.0 Encroachment on Uganda Railways Corporation land

On review of the detailed narration of the land impairment cases report of January 2020, I noted that some individuals and institutions have encroached on the URC land and have unlawfully gone ahead to put up developments without authority. The encroached on land comprised several properties, such as: LRV 4464 Folio 1 Plot 27 Nsambya Road; Plots 403, 1280, 701, 172, Block 232 Kyadondo in Kireka; Mailo Land MRV 148 Folio 19 Block 236 at Bweyogerere; Plot FRV 212 Folio 20 Plot 102 – 126 Kyabazinga Way; FRV 217 FOLIO 15 PLOTS 43-55, 45-53 Sports Road, Kome Close at Port Bell in Luzira; LRV 727 Folio 19, Plot 19-25, Atwal Road, Gulu; and several others.

In addition, I noted that cultivation of both annual and perennial crops such as maize, banana plantations, citrus fruit gardens, coffee plantation and others was being carried out on some parts of the Corporation land.

This has created health and safety issues associated with the integrity of the railway line formation, obstructions, as well as providing cover for the vandalism of track material (s). Furthermore, there is a risk that URC may lose its land due to illegal possessions of the land.











police are supposed to visit the scene, report the case to the Police station of the area, undertake investigations, where possible arrest the culprits, prosecute through courts of law and recover any stolen property.

I noted that items recovered under exhibits were not well taken care of. There was no systematic system to keep track of the recovered exhibits like slippers and rails, and taking record of their numbers, location and storage facilities of the same. Interviews with the Civil engineering personnel who are the custodians of the materials in question revealed that some of them were disappearing from the police headquarters while others that were being maintained at the station offices were left in the open. There were no clear procedures availed to the team with regard to how such equipment were either put back to use on the meter gauge or URC’s policy of the same to have the equipment disposed of. The Civil Engineering department did not avail details of how many equipment had been recovered, their location and details of re-use over the year under review.

Interviews with the head of security further revealed that the court penalty provisions were so inappropriate to deter the vice. In addition, whereas Management incurred UGX.78,965,000 as transport and allowances to facilitate the URC security and other staff to follow up on cases of theft, such expenses were not planned for; and considering that nothing was being done to follow up on recovered property from the thefts, this expenditure appeared wasteful. Furthermore, there were no reported recoveries in form of fines and penalties disclosed in the Corporation’s financial statements as miscellaneous revenue.

There is a risk of further deterioration in the value of the assets if no immediate action is taken. In addition, without proper documentation and whereabouts of the exhibits, I was unable to conclude on their status.

The Accounting Officer did not respond to this audit observation. I advised the Accounting officer to consider:

- Enforcing the civil engineering department to be more vigilant in securing the meter gauge, taking proper documentation of the exhibits recovered by number; assessing worthiness of equipment recovered and applicable re-use details.
- Using monitoring systems to track thefts on rails, for example the Trans-logic application in place should be given a module that can track the rails.
- Ensuring that the civil engineering department works closely with the internal security unit for timely response in case of vandalism/theft.











there is a material misstatement of this other information; I am required to report that fact. I have nothing to report in this regard.

Directors Responsibilities for the Financial Statements

The Directors are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in accordance with the requirements of the Uganda Railways Corporation Act and International Financial Reporting Standards on Accrual basis of Accounting and for such internal controls as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, the Directors are responsible for assessing the Corporation’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless management either intends to liquidate the Corporation or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so.

The Directors are responsible for overseeing the Corporation’s financial reporting process.

Auditor General’s Responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements

My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISSAIs will always detect a material misstatement, when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users, taken on the basis of these financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with ISSAIs, I exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. I also:-

- Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
- Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Corporation’s internal control.
- Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the management.
- Conclude on the appropriateness of Directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Corporation’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Corporation to cease to continue as a going concern.











- Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with the Directors regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.

I also provide the Directors with a statement that I have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on my independence, and where applicable, related safeguards.

From the matters communicated with the Directors, I determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. I describe these matters in my auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, I determine that a matter should not be communicated in my report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.

Other Reporting Responsibilities

As required by the Uganda Railways Corporation Act, I report to you, based on my audit, that, except for the effect of the matters raised in the preceding paragraphs:

- I have obtained all the information and explanations which to the best of my knowledge and belief were necessary for the purpose of my audit;
- In my opinion, proper books of account have been kept by the Authority, so far as appears from my examination of those books; and
- The Authority's statement of financial position and statement of financial performance are in agreement with the books of account.

Report on the Audit of Compliance with Legislation

In accordance with Section 19 (1) of the National Audit Act, 2008, I report to you, based on my work described on the audit of Financial Statements, that; except for the matters raised in compliance with legislation section below, and whose effect has been considered in forming my opinion on financial statements, the activities, financial transactions and information reflected in the financial statements that have come to my notice during the audit, are in all material respects, in compliance with the authorities which govern them.











management records; and a general lack of a comprehensive and standard government fleet management policy.

Subsequently, I developed procedures in order to assess the adequacy of government fleet management system in the delivery of Government service, and to identify any impediments and make recommendations for improvement. Specifically, the audit was intended to ascertain whether government Vehicles were/are:

- Acquired in compliance with Government vehicle acquisition guidelines;
- Comprehensively recorded in the assets register to ensure their proper management;
- Adequately allocated, operated and utilized to enable delivery of public service;
- Properly and regularly maintained to achieve optimal performance, increased useful lives and reduced running costs; and
- Disposed in compliance with PPDA guidelines, and disposal proceeds are properly accounted for.

The study took a scope of three financial years: 2017/18-2019/20. From the procedures undertaken, I noted the following key observations;

S/N	Key Observations	Audit Recommendation	
12.1	Improper maintenance of Motor Vehicle RecordsCorporation has a total of 48 locomotives of which only 11 locomotive engines were found in the asset register; some of these were in Uganda while the rest were in Kenya and Tanzania.noted however that there was no record of an inventory list for the locomotives maintained, their status of operation, engine capacities and location.Failure to maintain a complete asset register makes it hard for Management to follow up on all the locomotives which are the main source of revenue and operations for the Corporation.Accounting Officer explained that the maintenance records are generated by the workshop and they exist. However, the maintenance records were not availed for audit verification even after the Management response.ITheThe	ofI advised the Accounting Officer to ensure that an updated list all locomotives is maintained by the Corporation. I also advised the Accounting Officer to regularly make a status report after inspections are done.	
12.2	Failure to maintain Fuel Registerstheft, losses, wastage and misuse ofpractice requires organizations to put in place measures to eliminate fleet. Furthermore, organizations are required to designate an officer to be in charge of transport matters, who shall among other duties, maintain a fuel register on all fleet and carry out monthly fuel reconciliation exercises.itswas observed that whereas there was a designated officer responsible for URC transport matters, there were no fuel registers for the locomotives.to maintain registers for these locomotives makes the planning for the fuel needs difficult because the entity will not have a basis to guide it on how much fuel is used for different journeys and what can be done better to efficiently optimize its operations using the incurred costs.BestItFailure	to ensureI advised the Accounting Officer that individual fuel registers for all fleet are established, operationalized, and reconciliations undertaken for proper planning and maintenance.	














Whereas Management explained that the fuel registers were available, the registers were not availed for verification.

12.3 Failure to maintain vehicle logbooks

I advised the Accounting Officer to establish and I noted that the Corporation does not maintain logbooks for each operationalize fleet vehicle, and locomotive to show their movements which help in management-based ascertaining the fuel and maintenance costs. Without log books in practices. place, I could not ascertain whether movements of this fleet were duly authorized. The table below shows the fleet without logbooks.

S/n Vehicle Reg. no. Type of vehicle

1 UAA 078E Hino Truck 2 UAA 104E Hino Truck 3 UAA 122E Double Cabin Pickup 4 UAA 288E Mitsubishi Pajero 5 UAA 320E Double cabin 6 UAA 337F Nissan Patrol 7 UAA 454E Double cabin pickup

Absence of vehicle log books makes it difficult for Management to track fleet movements, fuel usage, and maintenance expenditures. This in turn may lead to fleet misuse and misappropriation of allocated fuel for unauthorized purposes.

12.4 Support to Entity Service Delivery

I advised the Accounting A review of the vehicle allocation to key service centres in the Officer to plan to have Corporation revealed that some departments or units were not adequate number of adequately allocated vehicles.

The Table below refers

Unit/ No. of Type of Are Reasons Effects Department vehicl vehicles allocated for requiring es allocated vehicles inadequat vehicles allocat adequate e ed and allocation

vehicles for service delivery for effectiveness in operations.











verify progress of the projects being paid for.inin ofDelays supervision mechanical operations different stations. Un timely response in undertaking the required repairs of the Meter Gauge Railway.Mechanical 1Civil 5Managing DirectorOperations - CS11NoNoLack of adequate fundingLack of adequate fundingYes N/AYes N/APick-up double cabinLorry- Mitsubishi Tipper- Hino Pickup- Double cabin Land cruiser- PradoLand cruiser- Pradoallocation of vehicles to the above departments/units deprives efforts of ensuring timely execution thus affecting the level of service delivery the URC planned interventions.in regard toInadequate											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											
toadvised the Accounting officer to engage key stakeholders secure funds for overhauling the URC operations fleet, for adequate service delivery.I12.5 Adequacy of Vehicle Maintenance funding14.1.7 of the Financial Accounting Manual 2007 requires individual departments to make budget estimates as per activities documented in their work plan for the period.review of the approved work plan and budget revealed that the entity made budget provisions for vehicle maintenance during the period under review. The entity realized and spent a total of UGX.207,841,165 against the vehicle maintenance budget of UGX.164,000,000 for the 2 FYs 2018/19 – 2019/20 reflecting excess spending of UGX.43,841,165, which is an increment of 26% of the budgeted vehicle asset maintenance funds, as indicated Table below:of vehicle maintenanceVehicle Maintenanc e Budget (A) (UGX)47,000,000117,000,000ofentityNo. operationa l motor Vehicles (B) 1513Amount spent (C) (UGX)Variance (A- C) (UGX)Average spendin g per vehicle (C/B) (UGX) 98,153,793 6,543,586 (51,153,793)109,687,372 8,437,490 7,312,628164,000,000 207,841,165 (43,841,165 )The Corporation had a vehicle maintenance budget provision of UGX.47,000,000 for 15 vehicles in FY 2018/19 but actually spent UGX.98,153,793. This gave an average maintenance expenditure cost of UGX.6,543,586. In FY 2019/2020, URC budgeted to maintain 13 vehicles at UGX.117,000,000 and actual expenditure was UGX.109,687,372 which resulted into an average maintenance cost of UGX.8,437,490. The repair expenditure revealed an increasing trend.AFY2018 /19 2019 /20 TotalSectionCost											
											
											
											
											
											
											
											














In addition, the Corporation has several locomotives as indicated in the table below:Locomotive Total fleet Active by end of class 36XX62XX 71XX 73XX 82XX 93XX 96XX Total66 2 24 5 1 4 48FY 2018/2019 03 0 4 0 - 2 9Active by end of FY 2019/2020 01 0 6 0 1 1 9the 48 locomotives, only 9 were active over the year under review. The rest were inactive as a result of lack of maintenance.is an indication that the cost of vehicle maintenance is high, and this is partly caused by the aging number of the fleet as illustrated by the fewer number of vehicle replacements. In the last five years, no new motor vehicle has been acquired.OfThis									
									
									
									
									
									
									
									
									
									
									
Repairs of vehiclesreview of a sample vehicles revealed that all the 13 vehicles (81%) of 16 vehicles selected for review were repaired. A total of 3 vehicles were found grounded and there were no plans in place to have them disposed of. Refer to the Table below for the vehicles that had been grounded.Motor Type of vehicle of Location Vehicle No: UAA 288F UAA 454E UAA 182EPajero - Mitsubishi Pick up-Double Cabin Tipper – HinoStatus vehicle Grounded Grounded GroundedKampala Kampala KampalaThe grounding of the vehicles without plans for disposal exposes them to further deterioration and loss of value.The Accounting Officer acknowledged the audit observation.12.6A								advised the Accounting Officer to put a mechanism in place to ensure that the vehicles that are no longer in use are boarded off.I	
									
									
									
									
									
									




13.0

Human Resource and Employee Costs











the immediate needs of the respective departments. It is not correct to say extra positions were created in the current year 2019/20.

However, despite the Accounting Officer’s explanation above, Management did not avail the Board minute approving the 419 extra positions that had been created for the staff taken over from RVR, but went ahead to recruit employees in these positions.

I advised the Accounting Officer to adhere to the approved staff structure.

13.2

Staff working beyond mandatory retirement

Section 14.3 of the Human Resource Manual 2018 requires all staff to be mandatorily retired at 60 unless in specific circumstances like health conditions when staff can be offered early retirement. Despite this regulation, it was noted that 46 staff that had attained the mandatory retirement age were still on the URC payroll. This practice denies the retiring staff their right to peaceful retirement and deprives the national employable labour force of work opportunities.

The Accounting Officer explained that according to the HR Manual, the Board of Directors has the prerogative to employ staff beyond 60 years of age and because of the uniqueness of the railway industry, the experience gained over years takes time to acquire skills.

Whereas Management responded as above, it did not have a succession plan to ensure that such staffs are replaced on retirement. Some of the staff were not specialized and had no unique skills to be retained. My review of the list of these staff revealed that some were fitters and office attendants whose skills were not of specialized nature.

I advised the Accounting Officer to; develop a succession plan to address issues of retirement and staff replacements; carry out a critical needs assessment to establish those among the 45 who are still needed, and to immediately retire the Srest. I will follow this up further in my next audit

13.3 Excess wage and salary bill – UGX 5,217,957,285

Paragraph 3.1.7 of the URC FAM, 2007 entrusts the Chief Executive Officer as the Accounting officer of the Corporation to be responsible for the day-to-day operations, compliance and ensuring that resources are utilized efficiently and in accordance with approved procedures, work plans, and budgets. In addition, Paragraph Sub paragraph (4) - responsibilities of the CEO - requires coordination and mobilization of, allocation, utilization, control and supervision of the Corporation’s resources in accordance with the corporate strategic plan, policies, procedures, rules and regulations.











Incurring expenditures in excess of the approved budget not only defeats the objectives of budgeting and budgetary controls but also partly results into the non- implementation of planned outputs.

The Accounting Officer acknowledged the audit observation.

I advised that the Accounting officer should always ensure compliance with the budget provisions in committing the Corporation resources.

14.0 Unclear cooperation with the Uganda Railway Police

Uganda Railway Corporation has an internal security department in its structure manned by a Security officer, an assistant security officer and 124 security guards as per the current staff establishment mandated with guarding the railway. They are also in charge of managing all the security issues. These work closely with the Uganda Railway Police under the Commandant of the Assistant Director Operations of Uganda Police. These help internal security in instances of evictions of encroaches on URC’s land.

From the review of the work done by this department, I noted the following;

- Uganda Police has about 208 policemen attached to their security unit as Railway Police.
- Uganda Police staff is each given lunch allowance of UGX 3,000 per day equivalent to UGX.90,000 per month.
- The Railway Police is given fuel for the fleet (motorcycles) which they use in their daily work at the Corporation, and are also given allowances at the Uganda Public Service rate for every operation they are involved in relating to the Corporation operations.

In the year under review, URC paid a total of UGX.460,092,260 as facilitation to Uganda Railway Police for the URC related facilities. Most of the work was done by the Railway Police under the security department of the Corporation. There is however no Memorandum of understanding (MoU) between Uganda Railway Corporation (URC) and the Uganda Police for the terms and conditions/ operations on which they are supposed to be supporting the Corporation. This makes their existence under the Corporation and the expenditure irregular.











I advised the Accounting officer to engage the concerned parties and draw up a Memorandum of Understanding with clear terms and reporting guidelines of the Railway Police in the Corporation affairs. I also advised the Accounting Officer that the Corporation should streamline the reporting structure to ensure that the security and civil departments in the Corporation work hand in hand with the Railway Police in instances of vandalism and arrests.

15.0

Procurement - Awarding of contracts to suppliers who failed to meet qualification criteria - UGX 2,088,434,541

Regulation 18(1) of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Evaluation) Regulations, 2014 requires the Evaluation Committee to determine the administrative compliance of a bidder by confirming that the bidder conforms satisfactorily to the basic instructions, requirements and the terms and conditions of the bidding documents without any material deviation or omission. In addition, regulation 34 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Evaluation) Regulations, 2014 requires the Evaluation Committee to undertake a post qualification evaluation to confirm whether the best evaluated bidder has the capacity and the resources to effectively execute procurement for the Procuring and Disposing entity. A post qualification evaluation shall be undertaken to confirm — (a) the experience and performance of the bidder, with regard to similar assignments; (b) the capacity of the bidder with respect to equipment and facilities; (c) the qualifications and experience of the personnel of the bidder; (d) for a bid to procure non-consultancy services or works, that the bidder has the capacity to supervise or manage the performance of the non-consultancy services or works, as the case may be, based on the qualifications of the supervisory or management staff of the bidder and the number and deployment of the staff; and (e) the financial capability to perform the assignment.

A review of the standard bid documents for sample procurement revealed that procurements worth UGX.2,088,434,541 were awarded to suppliers who did not meet the qualification criteria and evidence such as average annual volume for the past three (3) years, audited reports for the past three (3) years, assignments of similar nature of works, advance payment guarantee and performance securities were all lacking thus not verified during the audit.

These anomalies arose due to Management's failure to ensure that the PDU undertakes its functions in conformity with the PPDA legal framework. Without proper assessment at the evaluation stage, the Corporation risks awarding contracts to bidders without adequate capacity to undertake and complete the contracts.





















Appendices Appendix 1: Implementation of the approved budget

Sub program me	Output	Activities/ key performan ce targets	Are there clear targets and performance indicators to measure progress (yes/no) if no, give reason	Planned Target for the financial year (A)	Budgeted amount UGX (000) B	Revised Budget UGX (000 ) C	Amou nt releas ed (000) D	Amount spent UGX (000) E	Achieved target by Financial year end (Annual Performa nce report)F	Output variance (A-F)	Implementa tion status ( Fully (F), Partially (P), or Not Implemente d (NI)	Was the activity reported on in the periodic monitorin g reports- (Yes/No) If no, give reason	Is the performanc e of the activity accurately reported in the annual performanc e reports (yes/No) if no, give reason	Audit observat ion	
Mechanical	312201 Rolling stock	Rehabilitatio n/lease of locos	yes	Lease of two high capacity locomotive s	2,214,586	nil	nil	0	No loco was leased. .	Two high capacity locomotiv es were not leased. This was not undertak en	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	yes		
Mechanical		Rehab ferry	yes	One ship MV Umoja rehabilitat ed	22,800,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	One ship MV Umoja rehabilita ted, not undertak en	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Mechanical		Passenger services project	yes	10 passenger coaches refurbishe d, minimum repairs on the Kampala- portbell passenger service opened, Kampala -	10,000,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	10 passenge r coaches refurbish ed, minimum repairs on the Kampala- portbell passenge r service opened, Kampala	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		




23











	Kyengera passenger service opened.						passenge r service opened. This was not undertak en- Kyengera					
Mechanical	312202 Machine ry and equipme nt	Breakdown crane	yes	One break down crane refurbishe d	316,667	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	One break down crane refurbish ed. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Mechanical		Container cranes	yes	one container crane purchased	1,140,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	one container crane purchase d. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Civil		Purchase of generator and Floodlights	yes	One generator purchased	13,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	One generator purchase d. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Mechanical		Tools	No	Various workshop tools purchased	31,013	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Various workshop tools purchase d. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		




24











Legal, MD, Finance	312213 Compute rs	Computers	No	Assorted computers laptops and accessorie s purchased	151,900	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Assorted computer s, laptops and accessori es purchase d. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Legal, MD	312203 Furnitur e and fixtures	Furniture and Fixtures	No	Assorted furniture purchased	40,440	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Assorted furniture purchase d. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Civil	312103 Roads and Bridges	Track rehabilitation (track materials)	yes	10km of track repaired and 250 km maintaine d	17,610,561	nil	nil	456,230	250km of track routinely maintained ; weeding packing, realignmen t and opening drains. 2.6km of track partially renewed (resleepere d).	7.4 km of track not repaired	Partially Implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	yes		
Civil		Steel mills siding	yes	2km railway siding to to steel rolling mills prepared	2,519,168	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	2km railway siding to steel rolling mills prepared. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		




25











Civil		Boundary marking phase 4	yes	64km railway reserve land secured by physical markers	1,000,000	nil	nil	51,000	Boundary markers erected	Could not be ascertain ed	Partially Implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No, The kilometers covered by the boundary marker not specified in the report		
IT	312213 ICT equipme nt	Networking	yes	URC station integrated on to one Wide Area Network	909,580	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	URC station integrate d on to one Wide Area Network. This was not undertak en.	Not implemented	No. No monitoring reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report	Computer supplies - UGX 16M, CCTV and computer s- UGX 163M, Budgeting tool -UGX 75M, Telecom expenditu re -UGX 285M paid outside the budget.	




26











IT		Intercom	yes	URC stations connected to one intercom	55,500	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	URC stations connected to one intercom. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
IT		PBX	yes	URC stations connected to one PBX	74,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	URC stations connected to one PBX. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
IT		LAN radios	yes	LAN Radios integrated	34,595	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	LAN Radios integrated. This was not undertaken.	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Civil	312101 Land and buildings	Tororo Loco shade	yes	One building repaired	504,679	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	One building repaired. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Civil		Kla station fencing	No	Fence erected over Kampala headquart er land	727,019	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Fence erected over Kampala headquarter land was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report	Kampala good shed repaired at UGX 103M, Mukono ICD roof repaired at 249M, and dpf stores repaired at 67M all outside the budget of	




27











	19/20.	
Civil		Station sanitary improvemen t	no	Various stations and estates sanitary facilities repaired	142,423	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Various stations and estates sanitary facilities repaired were not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Civil		Portbell mechanical workshop	yes	one building repaired	57,697	nil	nil	5,600	Port bell ware house repaired	0	fully implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No		
Cicil		Portbell pier winch guide and timber	no	Pier guide and timber replaced	35,922	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Pier guide and timber replaced. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report	. Jinja pier repaired at 386 M outside the budget.	
Mechanical		Elect installations	no	Electrical installation s done	228,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Electrical installations done. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Operations		Birth expansion	no	Birth area over portbell dredged	700,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Birth area over port bell dredged. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		




28











Managing Director		Reception area re- modelling	yes	One reception at headquart er building remodeled	30,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	One reception at headquarter building remodeled. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Operations	312201 Motor Vehicles	Double cabin pick up	yes	1 double cabin pick up purchased	150,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	1 double cabin pick up purchased. This was not undertaken	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Operations		Motorcycles	yes	6 motorcycle s purchased	120,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	6 motorcycles purchased. This was not undertaken.	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Operations		Mini-bus	yes	2 mini- buses purchased	200,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	2 mini- buses purchased. This was not undertaken.	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Operations		Pickups	yes	3 pickups purchased	400,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	3 pickups purchased. This was not undertaken.	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Mechanical		Mini-lorry/ tipper	yes	I tipper purchased	304,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	I tipper purchased. This was not undertaken.	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		




29











Mechanical		Pool Vehicles	yes	2 pool vehicles purchased	950,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	2 pool vehicles purchased. This was not undertaken.	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Legal	312211 Office equipme nt	Colored printer/ scanner	yes	1	2,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	Colored printer/ scanner was not purchased	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		
Legal		One heavy duty colored printer	Yes	1	11,000	nil	nil	0	it was not undertaken	One heavy duty colored printer was not purchased	Not implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	No. The output was not reported on in the Annual performance report		




30











	Deferred mainten ance	General maintenance of the mainline, 500 wagons, and 3 locomotives	yes (partially)	General maintenan ce of the mainline, 500 wagons, and 3 locomotive s	20,021,727	nil	nil	8,837,000	Spares for rehabilitatio n of locos purchased. Ugx 477M, Locomotive and wagon tyres purchased at 496M, Locomotive batteries, spares and repairs procured ugx 2.8 bn, 76 wagons repaired at 464M, Fuel and Lubes for cargo movement purchased at 4.6 bn.	General maintenanc e of the mainline was not done, 424 wagons not rehabilitate d	Partially Implemented	No. No monitorin g reports were availed to audit.	yes		
					83,495,477			9,349,83 0							




31











