THE REPUBLIC O F UGAN D A

OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL

www.oag.go.ug | E-mail: info@oag.go.ug

A VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE ASSESSMENT OF BUDGET PERFORMANCE BY THE WORKS AND TRANSPORT SECTOR FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/19

A REPORT BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

DECEMBER, 2019





















THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of

Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19

A Report by the Auditor General

December, 2019











AUDITOR GENERAL’S MESSAGE

24 th December 2019

The Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament Parliament of Uganda Kampala.

A VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE ASSESSMENT WORKS AND TRANSPORT SECTOR FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR

In accordance with Article 163(3) of the Constitution,

Performance Assessment of Delivery of Planned Outputs the Financial Year 2018/19.

My office intends to carry out a follow-up at an

the recommendations in this report.

I would like to thank my staff who undertook this

Transport and other selected Works Sector entities for

period of the audit.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL











TABLE OF CONTENTS

LIST OF TABLES.........................................................................................................................................II ABBREVIATIONS........................................................................................................................................III

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY...............................................................................................................................IV

CHAPTER ONE - 1
INTRODUCTION - 2
Background to the audit 2 1.1
Motivation 3 1.2
Funding 2 1.3
  1.4 Audit Objectives - 4
  1.5 Audit Scope - 4
CHAPTER TWO - 5
AUDIT METHODOLOGY - 6
Sampling 6 2.1
  2.2 Data Collection Methods - 6
CHAPTER THREE: - 8
BUDGET PERFORMANCE CYCLE - 9
CHAPTER FOUR - 10
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS - 11
Extent of Delivery of Planned Outputs for the year 11 4.1
Factors impacting on Performance - 30
4.2
APPENDICES - 40
Appendix 1: Budget Execution Process - 40
Appendix 2: MoWT Diverted Amount and affected outputs - 42
Appendix 3: UNRA Diversion of funds - 44
Appendix 4: URF Diverted Amount - 85
Appendix 5: Entity delays in procurement process - 88
Appendix 6: Inconsistences in reporting of achieved targets - 90
Annexture 1: EIA field inspections - 95

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector I for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











LIST OF TABLES

Table 1: Funding of the Table 2: Approach and Methodology to the Audit Table 3: Delivery of planned

Table 4: Showing comparison in performance for MoWT Table 5: Showing extent of delivery of planned activities

Table 6: Delivery of Planned Outputs for Table 7: Delivery of Planned Outputs for Table 8: Delivery of Planned outputs for Table 9: Delivery of Planned Output for Table 10: Delivery of Planned outputs for

Table 11: Quantification of

Table 12: Budget Allocations for Planning Table 13: Budget, Release, and Expenditure/Absorption Table 14: Showing Revenue Collection for Table 15: Individual Entity Diversion Table 16: Inconsistences in Financial Performance

II

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











ABBREVIATIONS

CAA	Civil Aviation Authority	
DUCAR	District Urban and Community Access Roads	
EACAA	East African Civil Aviation Authority	
GAPR	Government Annual Performance Report	
GoU	Government of Uganda	
M&E	Monitoring and Evaluation	
MDA’s	Ministries, Departments and Agencies	
MoFPED	Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development	
MoWT	Ministry of Works and Transport	
NDPII	National Development Plan	
NPA	National Planning Authority	
OPM	Office of the Prime Minister	
SDP	Sector Development Plan	
SGR	Standard Gauge Railway	
UGX	Uganda Shillings	
UNRA	Uganda National Roads Authority	
URC	Uganda Railways Corporation	
URF	Uganda Road Fund	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector

III

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Works and Transport sector continues to In terms of implementation of activities that be among the key government priorities. In the

financial year (2018/2019) under review, the Sector

was allocated 15.93% of the national budget as per the Approved Budget Estimates for the year.

The sector strategic objectives are pursued through the various approved annual work plans of the

sector entities. In the year under review, the major

planned activities of the sector included: Revival of the National Airlines (MoWT); Development of Bukasa Port (MoWT); Upgrading and Expansion of the Entebbe International Airport (CAA); and Construction of various major national roads such

as The Northern Bypass (UNRA), and the Kampala

Flyover (UNRA); Improving the Kampala-Mukono

Passenger Railway line (URC) and Release of road

maintenance funds to designated agencies (URF).

The objective of the audit was to assess the

extent to which the sector was able to deliver on

the planned outputs for the year 2018/2019. This

was done through review of various documents,

inteviews and audit field inspections. The data

gathered was analysed to draw conclusions and possible recommendations. Set out below are the key findings.

KEY AUDIT FINDINGS

a) Extent of Delivery of Key Planned Outputs for the year

Out of the 169 outputs planned for implementation

by the five sector entities during the year

FY2018/19, a sample of 72 outputs were selected

contribute to the various sampled outputs, it was established through further analysis that overall, twenty eight (28) activities were fully implemented representing 24% of the planned activities, thirty (30) were partially implemented (25%) and fifty five (55) activities were not implemented at all (46%). It was also observed that for the six (6) activities representing 5% of the planned activites, the extent of delivery could not be established due to lack of supporting documentation such as monitoring reports to support the reported performance.

A comparison with the performance of last year was under taken using two entities that is MoWT

and UNRA. The selection was based on the size of budget allocation of the two entities contributing 89% of the total sector budget and for the reason that comparative data was available for the two

entities. The analysis shows that in terms of

percentage proportion of outputs achieved, there was a decline in performance from 28% reported

in the previous year (FY 17/18) to 9% in the current year (18/19). On the other hand, the proportion of

outputs not achieved increased from 21% in the previous year to 33.3% in the current year.

Similarly, as it was in the previous year, the

majority of outputs were partially achieved.

The factors impacting sector performance included; i) Planning and Budgeting: There were cases where output indicators were not quantified rendering assessment difficult. for the assessment. It was established that (6 Additionally, as noted in the Certificate of outputs) representing 8% of the selected sample of planned outputs were achieved, (32 outputs) representing 44% were partially achieved; and (28 outputs) representing 39% were not achieved. The performance of 6 outputs representing 8% was not established.

Compliance report 2018/19 issued by NPA, the Works and Transport Sector indicators and targets in the Sector Development Plan and budget

instruments still vary from those in the NDPII. It was also observed that the sector entities have

not prioritized the planning function, in a number of entities the planning function was constrained and could not operate effectively.

IV

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











ii)

Release Performance and Absorption: Out of the approved sector budget, a total of

UGX.4,768.625 billion was released or realized (representing a 97% of the approved budget); and UGX.4,372.981 billion was spent (representing 92% of the amount released.

In spite of this good revenue performance by most

of the sector entities, URC was able to realize only

27% of its budget. This has implications on its

ability to continue operating as a going concern.

It was also observed that the low absorption by UNRA (89%) was a result of appropriation of funds

to projects whose financing agreements had not

This has also created a challenge of accumulation of arrears. By spreading the limited resources too

wide, implementation the budget to deliver the planned outputs in a timely manner becomes a challenge.

iv)

Timeliness of the procurement process: A lot of time was lost between initiation of

procurement and contract signing.

The average time taken to complete most of

the key procurements exceeded the sixty (60) days recommended under the procurement

regulations. The duration ranged from 30 days to

almost 4 years.

been finalized. For example UGX.228.4billion v) was appropriated for the critical oil roads before

Monitoring and evaluation of implemented activities:

the loan was approved; UGX.79.7billion was also

It was noted that although all programs and

appropriated for Muyembe-Nakapiripirit and projects develop specific indicators for assessment Rwenkunye-Apac yet the loans had expired and

were still under re-negotiations.

iii) Diversion of Funds:

The review of the expenditure of sector entities

and the budget codes against which it was coded revealed instances of diversion of funds to budget

of performance, the entities lacked monitoring and evaluation tools such as specific work plans with clear set targets and verifiable performance indicators to facilitate routine data collection, analysis and reporting of information on the progress of implementation.

For some of the entities,there were no monitoring

lines with no relation to the planned outputs reports to confirm that M&E activities were

in question. For the sampled outputs, it was undertaken.

established that a total of UGX. 342,612,614,863 was diverted towards other activities without vi) Performance Reporting:

authority. This had an impact on the delivery of

planned outputs in the affected entities. Of the amount diverted,UGX.341.2billion relates to UNRA.

Through further analysis, it was observed that

UNRA faces unique challenges in that the annual

allocations always fall short of its total annual funding requirements for road development and maintainance partly caused by the Authority taking on new projects without a proportionate increment in funding.

Inconsistences in the amounts reported as budgeted, released and spent as well as the actual outputs achieved during the year were noted in the information reported in the sector budget performance reports and the statement of performance presented in the financial statements

of the entities as at 30th June 2019.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector V for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











KEY RECOMMENDATIONS The Sector entities should:

- Ensure proper alignment of the entity outputs with the sector outputs.

• Ensure that the planning function is prioritized and properly facilitated to enable it undertake

its function effectively.

• Liaise with MoFPED to ensure that funds are appropriated for only those projects whose

financing agreements have been finalized and are ready for implementation.

• Ensure that the financing agreements are expedited for those projects whose financing has

been agreed.

• Devise mechanisms of raising its annual revenues to ensure sustainability of its operations especially for entities in distress such as URC. This will require government support as well

as initiatives by URC management to re-assess its business model and come with a clear

business plan for the successful operation of the business, identifying sources of revenue, the intended customer base, products, and details of financing.

• Entities should avoid diversion of funds to unplanned activities. Where budget variations are

necessitated, appropriate authority should be sought in accordance with the established procedures.

• Ensure that procurements are undertaken within the timelines prescribed in the procurement

regulations.

• Develop M&E systems with clear administrative and institutional tasks for establishing data

collection, analysis and reporting.

• Ensure that performance and the related expenditure is accurately measured and reported on

to inform appropriate government decisions and actions.

VI

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











01

CHAPTER ONE A Value For Money Audit Report on the Transport Assessment Sector of for Budget the Financial Performance Year 2018/19 by the Works | A Report and by the Auditor General











CHAPTER ONE

INTRODUCTION

1.1 BACKGROUND TO THE AUDIT

Budget performance assessment involves the review of a project, program, function, operation or management systems and procedures of a

In the financial year under review (2018/2019),

the Sector was allocated 15.93% of the approved national budget for the year. The sector’s approved budget for the FY 2018/19 was UGX. 4,860.22 billion governmental entity to evaluate whether the constituting Central Government Grants and

entity is achieving its planned objectives in the employment of available resources. In this report, the focus of the budget performance assessment

is on the Works and Transport sector including the

key entities falling under the sector.

The Works and Transport sector is one of the

priority sectors of Government. It is spearheaded

by the Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT)

external funding. The total sector budget including the self-accounting statutory authorities and corporations amounted to UGX.4, 907.366billion.

The sector strategic objectives are pursued through the various approved annual work plans of the

sector entities. In the year under review, the major

planned activities of the sector included: Revival of the National Airlines (MoWT); Development of which is responsible for policy formulation, Bukasa Port (MoWT); Upgrading and Expansion legislation, strategic planning, setting standards, regulation, and monitoring and evaluation of the Sector 1 . The other entities within the sector include, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), Uganda Road Fund (URF), Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) and Civil Aviation Authority (CAA).

1.2 MOTIVATION

The Works and Transport Sector is a key sector

for National Development. The key strategic

objectives of the sector as per the NDPII include;

(i) developing adequate, reliable and efficient multimodal transport network in the country, (ii) improving the human resource and institutional capacity of the sector to efficiently execute the planned interventions, (iii) improving the National Construction Industry and (iv) Increasing safety of transport services. These objectives would be achieved through delivery of four strategic outcomes: (i) improved transportation system, (ii) enhanced capacity for works and technical services implementation (iii) strengthened local contractors and (iv) Improved safety of transport services.

of the Entebbe International Airport (CAA); and Construction of various major national roads such

as The Northern Bypass (UNRA), and the Kampala

Flyover (UNRA); Improving the Kampala-Mukono

Passenger Railway line (URC) and Release of road

maintenance funds to designated agencies (URF). However, the sector annual performance reports

and the previous reports by the Office of the Auditor General indicate that the sector is faced with

several challenges that impede progress in the achievement of the planned sector outputs during the implementation of its budget. These include; land compensation issues, delays in procurement processes, inadequate counterpart funding, and inadequate capacity of contractors, inadequate road maintenance funding and administrative efficiencies in some sector agencies.

It is against this background that the Office of the

Auditor General decided to undertake an audit to

assess the extent, to which the entities under the sector were able to deliver the planned outputs for

the financial year ended 30th June 2019, identify

challenges and suggest recommendations to improve performance.

1 Works and Transport sector Development plan 2015/16-2019/20 page 3

2

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











1.3 FUNDING

The priority programs in the sector development plan

sources:

- Government of Uganda through the MTEF

• Development Partners financing



- Non-conventional financing using public private

• Non-concessional loans

• Non-Tax revenue generated by sector entities.

In Financial year 2018/19, the sector budgeted for a its planned activities in line with the Sector

Table 1: Funding of the sector

ENTITY	BUDGETED AMOUNTS							
Billion Uganda Shillings	Recurrent (UGX	Development (UGX billion)			Total billion (18/19)	Budget Actuals billion	Actuals billion	
	Total Recurrent	GoU Devt	Donor	Total				
MoWT								
UNRA								
URF								
CAA					234.137	248.198	225.18	
URC					125.4	33.844	7.692	
TOTAL					4,907.366	4,768.625	3,626.782	




billion) (2018/19) (2017/18)

Devt Devt

78.606 370.81 425.382 796.192 874.798 1,059.217 253.941 98.614 1,612.7 1,419.1 3,031.8 3,130.414 2,886.4 2,597.452

535.697 6.870 6.870 542.617 540.966 542.517

As detailed in Table 1 above, the sector actual resource envelope, including the self-accounting

agencies/corporations increased by 18% compared to the previous year. The increase in the sector

funding is on account of the revival of the national airline. The recurrent and development component

for CAA and URC is appropriated under MoWT.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 3 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











1.4 AUDIT OBJECTIVES

The overall audit objective was to assess the extent of delivery of key planned outputs by the Works and

Transport Sector for the financial year ended 30th June 2019. This was undertaken through evaluation of

the processes of planning and budgeting, release and utilization of funds, monitoring and evaluation, and performance reporting.

1.4.1 Audit Questions

The specific audit questions were;

• Are the approved entity strategic and investment plans linked to the Sector Development plan

and the National Development Plan II?

• Are the entity set targets and performance indicators Specific, Measureable, Achievable,

Realistic and Time bound (SMART), and logically linked to the sector development plan and

sector M&E Framework?

• Were the budgeted funds realized as planned and in a timely manner?

- Were the released funds utilized for the intended purposes?
- Were the planned procurements undertaken on a timely basis?



• Were the priority projects properly monitored and evaluated?

- Were the achieved results accurately measured and reported on?



1.5 AUDIT SCOPE

The scope of the audit covered the key government implementing agencies such as MoWT, UNRA, URF,

URC and CAA. The audit covered the financial year ended 30th June 2019.

4

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











02

CHAPTER TWO A Value For Money Audit Report on the Transport Assessment Sector of for Budget the Financial Performance Year 2018/19 by the Works | A Report and by the Auditor General











CHAPTER TWO

AUDIT METHODOLOGY

The audit was conducted in accordance with the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) Performance Auditing Standards and the Value for Money Auditing guidelines prescribed in

the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) VFM audit manual. The standards require that the audit is

planned in a manner which ensures that an audit of high quality is carried out in an economic, efficient and effective way and in a timely manner.

2.1 Sampling

The selection of the Programmes was based on order of importance and link to the strategic plan and the National Development Plan II 2015/2016-2019/2020. The Annual Budget Performance Contracts of the accounting officers together with the annual workplans and budgets of the entities informed

the selection of Programmes and sub-Programmes/projects for the assessment. Outputs of a capital

development nature under the respective sub programmes or projects were selected; outputs of a recurrent nature were also selected on the basis of budget significance or size in terms of monetary value and importance in terms of achievement of the strategic sector’s objectives. This was done for all entities in the sector with a vote status including CAA and URC.

The audit team also applied professional judgement (based on understanding of the entity’s risks)

when selecting other outputs of a recurrent nature where it was deemed appropriate. A sample of key projects/activities undertaken by the different agencies in the Sector was visited to assess the extent to which the planned activities were achieved and challenges experienced noted.

2.2 Data Collection Methods

The data collection tool was designed based on the key processes (Planning and Budgeting, release of funds, utilization of funds, monitoring and evaluation, and performance reporting) with risk indicators, audit procedures, budget estimates, expenditure items, key outputs for assessment among other parameters. The tool was used together with other data collection methods to obtain data necessary to address each audit question as indicated in Table 2 below.

Table 2: Approach and Methodology to the Audit questions

Audit Question	Methodology	
Theme 1: Planning and Budgeting 1. Are the approved Sector entity strategic and investment plans linked to the Works and Trans- port Sector Development plan and the National Development Plan II?2. Are the set targets and performance indica- tors Specific, Measureable, Achievable, Realistic and Time bound (SMART), and logically linked to the strategic plan and M&E Framework?	• Reviewed the Ministerial Policy Statement for F/Y 2018/19 to ascertain whether set targets are realistic and consistent.• Reviewed the Budget Framework papers and Annual work plans to check whether the activities were budgeted for.• Reviewed the assessment reports done by National Planning Authority to obtain an understanding on the level of compliance with the budgeting instruments	




6

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Implementation 3. Were the set targets achieved as planned?4. Were the budgeted funds realized as planned and in a timely manner?5. Were the released funds utilized for the intended purposes?	• Reviewed MoWT Ministerial Policy Statements and budgets to ascertain funds budgeted on the different projects of stakeholders.• Reviewed the quarterly and annual performance reports to check whether the activities in the annual work plans were implemented.• Reviewed the planned activities in the performance contracts and compared them to the planned activities in the Ministerial Policy Statement.• Reviewed the cash flow plan for the sector to ascertain whether funds were spent according to the cash flow plan.• Interviewed key stakeholders to assess the level of coordination in the budget implementation process.• Inspection was also carried out to establish the extent of the implementation of planned outputs.	
Monitoring and Evaluation 6. Are the priority projects properly monitored and evaluated?	• Reviewed the entity annual plans and budgets and sector budgets for monitoring to ascertain whether funds are allocated for monitoring.• Reviewed and analyzed the Budget monitoring and quarterly performance reports to establish the extent to which monitoring activities were undertaken and followed up.	
Reporting 7. Are achieved results accurately measured and reported on?	• Reviewed the quarterly and annual performance reports to check whether the activities in the annual work plans were implemented.• Compared the reported performance against results of sampled field inspections.	




Source: OAG own analysis

2.2.1 Interviews

To corroborate the evidence gathered through document review and other sources (field inspections),

the team carried out interviews with key staff of sector entities including the following: Planning Officer (MoWT), M&E officer (UNRA and CAA), Accounting officers and departmental heads.

2.2.2 Physical Inspections/Observations

Physical inspections of key infrastructural projects undertaken within the sector were inspected

with the support of the OAG engineering team. Where possible- (CAA, MoWT and UNRA)- additional

procedures were undertaken to assess the quality of the work done. This was done to establish if there was a link between the implemented outputs and reported performance.

2.2.3 Data analysis

To support the findings and conclusions to the audit questions, both qualitative and quantitative data

was analyzed. Qualitative data was collected and analyzed using methods such as content analysis and

comparative analysis to establish their link to the overall strategic objectives of the entity, and to relate findings and their causes. Quantitative data (budget amounts, actual receipts, unabsorbed funds, and procurement supplies) was collected and analyzed using descriptive statistics (visually displaying data in tables) to establish the level of absorption, achievement of set targets, quality of civil works and measurement of performance indicators. A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 7 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











03

CHAPTER THREE A Value For Money Audit Report on the Transport Assessment Sector of for Budget the Financial Performance Year 2018/19 by the Works | A Report and by the Auditor General











CHAPTER THREE

BUDGET PERFORMANCE CYCLE

The budget performance cycle involves five (5) key processes which include: Planning and Budgeting;

Release of funds; Utilization of funds; Monitoring and Evaluation; and Performance Reporting as highlighted in Figure 1 below. These processes are prescribed under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, PFMA, Financial Regulations and various Treasury Budget Directives. These were used in

determining the criteria that was used identifying the main causes to the performance gaps and to identify

realistic and practical recommendations for the problems identified. Details of the process description

are in Appendix 1.

Figure 1: Budget Performance Cycle.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 9 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











04

CHAPTERFOUR A Value For Money Audit Report on the Transport Assessment Sector of for Budget the Financial Performance Year 2018/19 by the Works | A Report and by the Auditor General











CHAPTER FOUR

FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

4.1 EXTENT OF DELIVERY OF PLANNED OUTPUTS FOR THE YEAR

Budget allocations are based on agreed planned outputs to be achieved during the financial year.

During budget implementation, effort should be made to achieve the agreed targets of the entity within the available resource envelop.

Section 45 (3) of the PFMA 2015 states that the Accounting Officer shall enter into an annual budget performance contract with the Secretary to the Treasury which shall bind the Accounting Officer to

deliver on the activities in the work plan of the vote for a financial year, submitted under section 13 (15).

Section 21(1) of the Public Finance Management Act entrusts the Accounting Officers with the

responsibility of planning and managing the entity activities as indicated in the policy statement of the

votes based on the annual cash flow plan issued by the Secretary to Treasury during budget execution.

Through the review of the sector performance reports together with the relevant supporting documents

and verifications undertaken during audit inspections, it was observed that the sector partially achieved most of the key planned outputs for the year 2018/19. The results are based on the assessment of the

performanmce of the five entities falling within the sector as summarized in Table 3 below.

Table 3: Delivery of planned outputs

Entity	Total Number of Outputs (18/19)	Number of Sampled Outputs (18/19)	Budget allocation of sample in relation to 18/19 total entity budget (%)	Achieved*	Partially Achieved**	Not Achieved***	Unable to confirm	
				18/19	18/19	18/19	18/19	
MoWT	30	18	56	1	16	1	0	
UNRA	56	15	51	2	4	9	0	
CAA	43	18	71	1	3	14	0	
URC	20	9	42	1	4	4	0	
URF	20	12	41	1	5	0	6	
Totals	169	72		6	32	28	6	
								
%ge Performance (18/19)				8	44	39	8	




Source: OAG Analysis of planned outputs.

* Achieved No of Outputs fully implemented as planned ** Partially Achieved No of Outputs not fully implemented as planned

*** Not Achieved No of Outputs not implemented at all ****Unable to confirm No of Outputs whose performance was not confirmed

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 11 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











The analysis from Table 3 above shows that for the financial year 2018/19, only 8% of the selected sample of key planned outputs were achieved, 44% were partially achieved while 39% were not achieved and the level of implementation for 8% of the outputs could not be confirmed.

A comparison with the performance of last year was under taken using two entities that is MoWT and UNRA. The selection was based on the size of budget allocation of the two entities contributing 89% of the total sector budget and for the reason that comparative data was available for the two entities as they were part of the sample that was

assessed in FY2017/18 as shown in Table 4 below.

Table 4: Showing comparison in performance for MoWT and UNRA.

Entity	Total Number of Outputs (18/19)	Number of Sam- pled Outputs (18/19)	Budget allocation of sample in relation to 18/19 total entity budget (%)	Achieved*	Partially Achieved**	Not Achieved/ Unable to confirm***	
				18/19	18/19	18/19	
MoWT	30	18	42	1	16	1	
UNRA	56	15	41	2	3	10	
Totals	86	72		3	19	11	
							
%ge Performance (18/19)				9	58	33.3	
%ge Performance (17/18)				28	51	21	




Source: OAG Analysis.

The analysis shows in terms of percentage proportion of outputs achieved, there was a decline in performance from 28% reported in the previous year (FY 17/18) to 9% in the current year (18/19). On the other hand, the proportion of outputs not achieved increased from 21% in the previous year to 33.3% in the current year.

Similarly, as it was in the previous year, the majority of outputs were partially achieved.

Since activities facilitate achievement of planned outputs,a similar assessment was undertaken to establish

performance at the activity level. For the sampled outputs, there were 119 activities planned to be implemented to achieve the expected outputs (72). Analysis of activity performance of the sector entities is shown in Table 5 below.

Table 5: Showing extent of delivery of planned activities by sector entities

Entity	Sampled outputs	No. of Activities/	Fully implemented	Partially implimented	Not implemented	Not confirmed	
MoWT	18	59	22	14	23	0	
UNRA	15	21	3	3	15	0	
CAA	18	18	1	4	13	0	
URC	9	9	1	4	4	0	
URF	12	12	1	5	0	6	
Totals	72	119	28	30	55	6	
							
%ge Performance Activities			24	25	46	5	
%ge Performance Output			8	44	39	8	




Source: OAG review of approved work plans, MPS, Budget estimates and 4th quarter performance reports 2018/19.

12

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











The analysis showed that overall, twenty eight (28) activities were fully implemented representing 24%

of the planned activities, thirty (30) were partially implemented (26%) and fifty five (55) activities were not implemented at all (47%). It was also observed that for the six (6) activities representing 5% of the planned activites, the extent of delivery could not be established due to lack of supporting documentation such as monitoring reports to support the reported performance. Set out in the sections below is a more detailed description of the performance of the sector entities.

4.1.1 Ministry of Works and Transport

At the entity level, the review of the Ministry’s performance reports together with the relevant supporting documents and audit inspections showed that the Ministry partially achieved most of the

key planned outputs for the year 2018/19. Table 6 below summarizes the results of the review of the implementation of the selected sample of key priorities planned by the Ministry.

Table 6: Delivery of Planned Outputs for MoWT.

Output	Planned Activity	Amount (UGX. Billion)	Activity Delivery	Audit Remarks	
Project 1096: Support to computerized driving permit - Partially Achieved					
Road safety pro- grams coordinated and monitored	Contractor for new office premises for UCDP procured	Budget: 2.7 Released: 2.322 Spent: 2.322	Partially Achieved	Scheme designs and concept for the one stop center building to accommodate the One Stop Centre and New site (URC facility) assessment concluded.	
Government Build- ings and Adminis- trative Infrastruc- ture	10% of building works for new office premises for UCDP completed		Not Achieved	The plan to complete 10% building works for the new office premises was not achieved due to change of location as top manage- ment anticipated congestion around the original proposed location (Current TLB premises).	
Purchase of office and ICT Equip- ment, including software.	Support to Auto- mated Licensing System provided		Achieved	Funds were spent on installation of digital archiving system	
Program 02: Transport infrastructure and services - Partially Achieved					
Policies, Laws, Guidelines, Plans and Strategies	a) Performance of URC, CAA, EACAA Soroti monitored and evaluated;	Budget: 13.47 Released: 293.51 Spent: 293.25Note: UGX 122,668,603,403 was utilized towards the Purchase of passenger planes (Airbus) and consolidat- ed allowances to National Airline.	Partially Achieved	a) Interviews indicated that monitoring activities relating to URC, CAA, and EACAA were undertaken and these formed the basis for release of funds to the Agencies.	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 13 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Output	Planned Activity	Amount (UGX. Billion)	Activity Delivery	Audit Remarks	
	b) Regional Trans- port Sector projects and programs coordinated;		Achieved	b) The activities relating to the regional transport sector projects and programs like Regional workshop to review the draft final Management Plan of Lake Edward and Albert Basin in Gisenyi Rwanda was held; Report of refined Petroleum Product Pipe- line Cluster Experts Site Visit held at Kenya Pipeline Company Limited was also held in Kisumu.The report in respect to International Ar- bitration between Rift Valley Railways and GoU was held on the 12-14 March 2019. This is part of the coordination for the Regional Transport Sector Projects and Programs.	
	c) Support to Logis- tics Development group (Green Trans- port and Logistics activities);		Not Achieved	c) Support to Logistics Development Group (Green Transport and Logistics Activities) was not implemented.	
	d) Railway Trans- port Policy devel- oped		Not Achieved	d) The Railway Transport Policy was not completed. It is still in draft form, pending the ministry approval.	
Project 0951: East African Trade and Transport Facilitation - Partially Achieved					
Boarder Post Rehabilitation/ Construction	a) Construction of Elegu OSBP completed	Budget: 7.01 Release:11.88 Spent: 5.633Note: UGX 1.65bn was spent on repair of Japanese Equipment; Development of Kabaale Inter- national Airport and Supply of digital Archiving System.	Partially Achieved	a) Elegu boarder post, Phase 2 has started and almost to completion. However, completion certificate and occupancy is yet to be issued.	
	b) 85% construction works for Katuna OSBP (Phase 1) completed;		Achieved	b) Construction of Katuna boarder post was done.	
	c) 90% construc- tion works for the exit road at Malaba OSBP completed;		Achieved	c) The exit road to Malaba was constructed.	
	d) Contractor for construction of Katuna OSBP (Phase 2) procured		Not achieved	d) The procurement contractor for construction of Katuna boarder post Phase II was not completed that is still at evaluation stage at the time of the audit.	
	e) Designs for Mpondwe, Bunaga- na, Goli and Ntoroko OSBPs completed; Monthly project progress reports prepared.		Partially achieved	e) Designs for Mpondwe, Bunagana, Goli and Ntoroko boarder posts were done. The monthly progress reports as planned for progress of works were not available.	
Project 1097: New standard guage railway line - Partially Achieved					
Development of Standard Gauge Railway Infrastruc- ture	a) Comprehensive fiscal analysis of the Eastern route finalized;	Budget: 39.2 Release: 33.43 Spent: 33.432	Not Achieved	a) The comprehensive fiscal analysis report was not completed. This was still pending review and adoption by the Peer Review Committee;	
	b) Training of staff undertaken;		Not Achieved	b) Training of staff was not undertaken;	




14

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Output	Planned Activity	Amount (UGX. Billion)	Activity Delivery	Audit Remarks	
	c) Profiling of unsolicited local content participants undertaken;	Note: The funds released related to quite a num- ber of activities and were there- fore difficult to attach amount spent on a spe- cific output.	Not Achieved	c) The profiling of unsolicited local content participants was not completed;	
	d) National and Regional coordi- nation of the SGR project undertaken;		Partially Achieved	d) The National and Regional coordination of the SGR project undertaken;	
	e) Statistical and economic software and equipment’s procured;		Not Achieved	e) Statistical and economic software and equipment was not procured.	
	f) Affected PAPs along the corridor acquired;		Achieved	f) 264 PAPs were compensated along thecorridor.	
	g) 14.433acres of SGR corridor acquired		Achieved	e) 26.704 acres for the SGR corridor wasacquired.	
Project 1284: Development of New Kampala port in Bukasa - Partially Achieved					
Feasibility / Design Studies	a) Implementation of RAP	Budget:3.9 Release:3.7 Spent: 7.7Note: Funds totaling to UGX 766.9m for this activity had been used for construction of Sezibwa Swamp and office con- sumables.	Achieved	a) The Resettlement Action Plan study report for Bukasa was approved and implementation commenced.	
Construction/ Rehabilitation of Inland Water Transport Infra- structure	b) 20% of port dredging and surcharging works completed		Not Achieved	b) The 20% of dredging and surcharging works were not done due to procurement delays of dredging and surcharging contrac- tor. The law required that a local contractor should be included in the civil works which was eventually resolved as proposed. The works were also affected by delays in compensation of PAPs in the area where works were to be done.	
Construction/ Rehabilitation of Inland Water Transport Infra- structure	c) Detailed engi- neering design for the New Kam- pala Port at Bukasa completed		Not Achieved	The Detailed Engineering design for New Kampala Bukasa was not completed	
Project 1373: Entebbe Airport Rehabilitation Phase 1 - Not Achieved					
Rehabilitation of Upcountry Aero- dromes	a) 100% works for the new cargo center complex for Entebbe Airport completed	Budget:151.58 Released: 92.68 Spent:92.68Note: Overall the project progress was at 64% physical progress as at October 2019. Annexture 1 refers	Not Achieved	a) The works on the new cargo center complex for Entebbe Airport were not completed.	
	b) 100% rehabilitation works for aprons 1 and 2 completed		Not Achieved	b) The rehabilitation works for aprons 1 and 2 were not completed.	
	c) 100% rehabilitation works for runway 12/30 and its associated taxiways completed		Not Achieved	c) The rehabilitation works for runways and its associated taxiways was not completed.	
	d) 20% works for the New Passenger Terminal completed		Not Achieved	d) The new passenger terminal building works are yet to commence as it is depend- ent on completion of the new cargo centre complex. Physical progress was at 0%.	
					




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 15

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Output Planned Activity Amount Activity Audit Remarks (UGX. Billion) Delivery

Project 1489: Development of Kabaale Airport - Partially Achieved

a) 50% physical works for the Budget:0.5 Border Post development of Release:6.25 Partially Rehabilitation/ Kabaale airport Spent: 6.25 Achieved Construction (Phase I) completed;

Project 1512: Uganda National Airline Project - Partially Achieved

a) National Airline launched and Policies, Laws, operational Guidelines, Plans and Strategies

Purchase of Motor a) 4 aircrafts for vehicles and other the National Airline Transport Equip- procured; ment

Achieved Budget: 129.5 Release: 409.55 Spent: 117.232

Partially Achieved

Sub-program: Roads and Bridges - Achieved

a) TNA carried out in 20DLGs & 20 urban LGs for selection of Techni- cal Supervisors and Non Engineering Achieved staff to undertake training in LBT,LCS, & CCIs. Bugdet:4 Release:4 Support to MELTC Spent:4 b) TNA carried out in 10 DLGs for selection of train- able Road Gang Achieved Leaders in LBT/ Routine road main- tenance.

c) Technical Super- Achieved visors from 10 DLGs

Project 1421: Development of the construction industry - Partially Achieved

a) General speci- fications for roads and bridges works Achieved reviewed and up- dated ;

Planned activities for Phase I not fully completed. Activities done include: Clearing and grubbing; swamp treatment; cut and fill, plus the drainage works and road diversion of 3.8km was accomplished.

Progress was affected by land compensation issues, delays in procurement of supervision consultant and release of GoU counterpart funding.

a) National Airline launch and operation- alization was achieved. Key staffs were recruited as planned using a consultancy. The Uganda National Airline started opera- tions. However, the Five phase certification process for the Air Operator Certificate was still ongoing at the end of June 2019.

b) Two bombardier CRJ900 aircraft were delivered out of the four planned aircrafts.

a) TNA carried out in 20DLGs & 20 urban LGs for selection of Technical Supervisors and Non Engineering staff to undertake training in LBT,LCS, & CCIs output was achieved. 198 No. Road maintenance gangs leaders and 19No road overseers from various districts (20) and urban local governments (20). The non-engineering staffs were also trained.

b) TNA carried out in 10 DLGs for selection of trainable Road Gang Leaders in LBT/ Routine road maintenance. The training needs assessment for 10 DLGs was carried out on routine road maintenance.

c) Technical supervisor were also trained for the 10 DLGs.

a) The General specifications for roads and bridges works was not updated.

b) UCICO bill final- b) UCICO bill was not finalized. ised and estab- Budget:8.2 Not Achieved Government reversed and canceled the bill. Policies, Laws, lished; Release:7.79 Guidelines, Plans and Strategies c) Unit cost study Spent: 3.8 c) The Unit cost Study for road construction for road construc- Partially and maintenance was partially completed. tion and mainte- Achieved However this was yet to be approved. nance prepared;

d) Non-motorised transport manual Partially prepared; Achieved

d) Non-Motorised transport manual was partially completed. It was in draft form yet to be approved by the responsible authori- ties.

16

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Output	Planned Activity	Amount (UGX. Billion)	Activity Delivery	Audit Remarks	
Project 0269: Construction of Selected Bridges - Partially Achieved					
Monitoring and capacity building support for district road works	Construction of Bambala and Kabindula Swamp Crossings (Ky- ankwanzi District) completed;	Budget:18.6 Release:18.4 Spent: 17.03	Achieved	a) The construction of Bambala, and Kabindula swamp crossing were completed.	
	Construction of Kisaigi Bridge (Kakumiro District) completed;		Achieved	b) Construction of Kisaigi Bridge was completed.	
Major Bridges	c) Design and Construction of Sezibwa swamp crossing between Kayunga and Naka- songola ; Wangobo- Nsonkwe Namu- nyumya; Muzizi and Amodo swamp among others.		Partially Achieved	The design and construction of sezibwa swamp crossing was not completed. This activity was still on going at the time of the audit. However, there were a number of bridges that had not been completed like Wangobo- Nsonkwe-Namunyumya; Muzizi and Amodo Swamp among others. This was attributable to procurement being halted and taken over by UNRA for the case of Amua Bridge; while for others there was Delayed procurement of materials for the construction of metallic ladder and lack of equipment.	
Project 0307: Rehabilitation of District Roads - Not Achieved					
Urban Roads construction and rehabilitation (Bi- tumen Standards)	a) Rehabilitation of roads in Mityana MC - 2.35km on Old Kampala Rd & Sta- tion road completed	Budget: 8.411 Release: 8.274 Spent: 8.096Note: The activities were not achieved due to various reasons. For example the procurement delays noted in obtaining contractors for the works to be done on Mityana MC on Kampala Road and Station Road.; Delays in concluding detailed designs and engineers cost estimates affected the planned road works.	Not Achieved	a) Rehabilitation of roads in Mityana MC was not completed. Only 1.7km of the road was completed.	
	Feasibility study / design for urban roads rehabilita- tion project in 20 Municipal Councils undertaken		Not Achieved	b) The feasibility study or design for urban roads rehabilitation project was not under- taken at the time of audit.	
	c) Additional works on tarmacking parking areas and access road to Guest Wing & Health Facility at NALI		Not Achieved	c) The additional works on tarmacking parking areas and access road to Guest Wing and Health facility at NALI Estate were not completed as we noted that drainage works were still ongoing along other activities.	
Project 0306: Urban Road Re-sealing - Not Achieved					
Roads, Streets and Highways	a) Rehabilitaiton/ Upgrading to bitu- men standard of Busabala Road (12km) in Makindye Ssabagabo MC- Phase 1	Budget: 6 Release: 5.860 Spent: 5.860	Not Achieved	Rehabilitation/upgrading to bitumen standard of Busabala Road (121km) in Makindye Ssabagabo MC-Phase I was not achieved. This was due to the change by the Top Management Team to rehabilitate the Cathedral and Church Roads in Bugemebe TC and Internal Roads at the National Agric Show Grounds in Jinja M.C where funds were resorted to.	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 17

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Output	Planned Activity	Amount (UGX. Billion)	Activity Delivery	Audit Remarks	
Project 0307: Rehabilitation of district roads - Partially Achieved					
Roads, Streets and Highways	a) Construction of roads using probase technol- ogy undertaken for 75km of roads including Nansana- Bira- Kireka road (4.7km);	Budget:73.895 Release:74.085 Spent: 80.779Note: It was difficult to establish how much had been spent on a specific planned output, vis-a-vis the deliverables reported.	Achieved	a) Construction of roads using probase technology undertaken for 75km of roads including Nansana - Bira - Kireka road (4.7km) was completed.	
	b) Geometric and pavement design of road sections to be constructed		Partially Achieved	b) Geometric and pavement design of road section were not completed.	
	c) Specialised Equipment for survey procured		Not Achieved	c) Specialized Equipment for survey were not procured.	
	d) Construction of access road to Mwiri (3.1km) completed		Achieved	d) The construction of the access road to Mwiri was completed.	
Sub-program: Mechanical Engineering Services - Partially Achieved					
Operation and maintanance of MV Kalangala ship and other delegataed ferries	a) Ferry landing at Nakiwogo ( Enteb- be) and Lutoboka Kalangala) main- tained;	Budget: 33.2 Release: 33.07 Spent: 32.594	Achieved	a) The landing site at Nakiwogo andLutoboka was maintained;	
	b) Operation of MV Kalangala ship sup- ported and moni- tored;		Achieved	b) Operation of MV Kalangala ship was sup- ported.	
	c) Marine insur- ance for MV Kalan- gala and lake Bisina ferry secured;		Achieved	c) Marine Insurance for MV Kalangala and L. Bisina was secured.	
	d) Class survey for MV Kalangala undertaken;		Partially Achieved	d) I could not confirm if the survey had been extensively undertaken, as there were no reports presented to the audit team.	
Project 1405: Rehabilitation of Regional Mechanical Workshop - Partially Achieved					
Government Build- ings and Adminis- trative Infrastruc- ture	a) Gulu Regional Mechanical Work- shop parking yard paved;	Budget:3.030 Release: 2.810 Spent: 2.810	Achieved	a) Gulu Regional Workshops parking yard was paved.	
	b) Mbarara Regional Mechanical Work- shop yard paved;		Achieved	b) Mbarara Regional Mechanical Workshop yard was also paved.	
	c) 2 Zonal Centers established;		Not Achieved	c) The two zonal centers were not established.	




18

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Output	Planned Activity	Amount (UGX. Billion)	Activity Delivery	Audit Remarks	
Project 1105: Strengthening Sector Coordination, Planning and ICT - Partially Achieved					
Strengthening sec- tor coordination, planning and ICT	a) Ministerial ICT Policy developed;	Budget: 1.2 Release: 1.098 Spent: 7.966	Partially Achieved	a) The Ministerial ICT Policy was developed.	
	b) Coordinates and mapping of infra- structure on Lake Victoria.		Not Achieved	b) Coordinates and mapping of infrastructure identified on Lake Victoria, the activity was not completed.	
	c) The ToRs for Min- istrrial ICT policy and Environmental Impact Assessment reviewed report of Portbell and Jinja landing sites com- pleted.		Achieved	c) The ToRs for Ministrial ICT policy and Environmental Impact Assessment review report for Portbell and Jinja landing sites were provided for audit.	
	d) Feasibility Study and detailed engineering designs for access roads, community jetties and landing sites on L.Victoria com- pleted.		Not Achieved	d) Feasibility study and detailed engineering designs for access roads, community jetties and Landing sites on Lake Victoria were not done since there was no funding from world bank as expected.	
	e) National Transport Master Plan conducted and preparation of a Multi modal transport strategy commenced;		Partially Achieved	e) The National Transport Master Plan conducted and preparation of the Multi modal transport strategy. The National Transport Master Plan was conducted while the preparation of the Multi Modal transport strategy was not done.	




Source: MPS, Interviews, OAG reviews

Table 6 above indicates that the Ministry was able to fully achieve only one (1) output out of the eighteen

(18) sampled outputs. Sixteen (16) outputs were partially achieved while one was not implemented at

all.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 19

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











4.1.2 Uganda National Roads Authority

A review of the Ministerial Policy Statements, approved budgets expenditures and UNRA performance reports

for the sampled projects revealed that the actual outputs largely varied with the planned/budgeted outputs as indicated in Table 7 below.

Table 7: Delivery of Planned Outputs for UNRA.

Program/Project	Planned output	Amount (UGX) Billion	Output Delivery	Audit Remarks	
1040 Design Kap- chorwa-Suam road 77km	15km- equiva- lents construct- ed	Budget: 132.88 Release: 93.77 Spent: 57.55	Partially Achieved	Output was partially achieved at the end of the year.This was due to delays in acquisition of right of way attributed to land disputes, which affected the progress of works.	
1281 Tirinyi-Pallisa- Kumi/Kamonkoli Road	40km- equiva- lents construct- ed	Budget: 122.1 Release: 70.12 Spent: 65.01	Not Achieved	This output was not achieved due to the long procurement process. The procurement was still ongoing for Consultancy Services for Design Review and Construction Supervision of Upgrad- ing of Tirinyi-Paliisa-Kumi/Pallisa-Kamonkoli Road. There were delays noted n acquisition of land and procurement of consultants.The funds were diverted to other projects.	
1322 Upgrading of Muyembe-Naka- piripirit (92 km)	20km equivalent constructed	Budget: 84.29 Release: 47.67 Spent: 4.59	Not Achieved	This output was not achieved. This was because the procurement for the civil works contract was still ongoing. There also delays in finalizing of the loan re-negotiations for Muyembe Nakapiripirit Road Project. This has delayed signing of the works contract. However, an IDB Mission in June 2019 indicated that Muyembe Nakapiripirit would soon be cleared.The funds were funds were diverted to other projects.	
1319 Kampala Flyover	5% of works completed	Budget: 0 Release: 1.238 Spent: 0.9	Not Achieved	The output was not achieved owing to delays in compensation of project affected persons.The funds were diverted to other projects.	
1176 Hoima-Wanse- ko Road (83Km)	24.25km - equivalents constructed	Budget: 115.5 Release: 89.2 Spent: 81.48	Not Achieved	The output was not achieved. The project was scheduled when it was not ready for implementa- tion. Funds were released even when the project preparations had not been finalized.The funds were diverted and spent on other projects.	
1490 Luwero- Buta- langu	16km- equiva- lents construct- ed	Budget: 45 Release: 0.09 Spent: 0.09	Not Achieved	The output was not implemented. This was due to the delays in procurement of contractor for civil works partly attributed to guidance from BADEA for UNRA to first procure the design review and supervision consultant before procuring the civil works contractor.The funds were diverted and spent on other projects.	




20

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Planned Amount Program/Project output (UGX) Billion

Budget: 392.9 223km of roads 1056 Transport Cor- Release: 354 to be worked on ridor Project Spent: 353.49 during the year

1403 Soroti-Katakwi- 60km-equiv- Budget: 140 Moroto-Lokitonyala alents con- Release: 140 road structed Spent: 140

Budget: 74 32km-equiv- 1276 Mubende-Ka- Release: 73.6 alents con- kumiro-Kagadi Road Spent: 73.6 structed

Budget: 103.23 1277 Kampala 7km-equiv- Release: 84.27 Northern Bypass alents con- Spent: 83.23 Phase 2 structed

Output Delivery Audit Remarks

This output was not implemented. This was caused by UNRA’s request to haul procurement of a consultant for the works. Not Achieved I also noted that out of UGX 354.07Bn cumulative release for FY 2018/19, UGX 353.49Bn was spent on other activities leaving UGX 0.58Bn unspent by close of the FY.

The Soroti-Katakwi-Akisim (100Km) was partially Partially Achieved achieved by the end of quarter four.

35km road works was achieved. The over perfor- mance against target is due to early acquisition Achieved of the right of way (which was acquired in the previous financial years). This also explains the current arrears under the project.

The output was not implemented. This was due to delayed Access to Site owing to design improve- ments, disputed compensation amounts by PAPs, and family disputes over land ownership. There has also been increase in scope of works Not Achieved due to Design improvements. 100% of the budget was, however, absorbed despite the under achievement of km equivalents attained. This was due to payment of arrears related to FY 2017/18.

15 km - equiva- 1275 Olwiyo Gulu lents construct- Kitgum Road ed and Payment of Retention

Budget: 45.83 Release: 45.55 Achieved Spent: 45.55

1000 Hectares Budget: 249.66 of land and 1506 Land Budget: 270.17 properties Partially Achieved acquisition Budget: 269.53 therein acquired.

The project output was achieved. The Defects Liability Period ended on 17th March 2019.

The output was partially achieved. Land compensation undertaken howver UNRA still faces a challenge of securing titles. The largest percentage of the funds was spent on activities not related to the planned output. For example;

- Payment of salaries and NSSF for contract and temporary staff ;
- Travel inland, venue hire and motor vehicle maintenance;
- Facilitation for identification, verification and disclosure activities along National Roads during the process of acquiring the right of way;
- Facilitation for pre-disclosure engagements and identification, verification and disclosure activities.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 21 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Planned Amount Program/Project Output Delivery output (UGX) Billion

1. Technical assistance to staff.



2. Automation of the Balanced scorecard. Budget: 70.4 1510 UNRA retooling 3) Cascading Release: 59.4 Not Achieved Project and aligning the Spent: 60.45 tier 1 and 2 scorecard.



4. Gender and Equity policy





5. Unit cost estimation.

a) Procurement of Bukungu- Kagwala- Kaberamaido (BKK) Ferry. Budget: 16.5 0267 Improvement Release: 14.85 Not Achieved of ferry services b) Construction Spent: 14.76 of Sigulu Ferry.

c) Rehabilitation of Old Bukakata Ferry.

27 Percent of 1320 Construction of Bridge works 66 selected bridges completed

Budget: 32.5 Release: 28.98 Partially Achieved Spent: 29.32

Source: OAG Reviews of performance reports and physical inspections.

Audit Remarks

a) Technical assistance to staff was provided. Automation of the Balanced scorecard was not achieved

b) Cascading and aligning the tier 1 and 2 score card was not achieved.

c) Gender and Equity policy.

d) Unit cost estimation was not achieved. The funds were diverted and spent on other Projects like Kamwenge Fortportal road and Gulu Atiak Road compesations.

a) Procurement of Bukungu-Kagwala- Kaberamaido (BKK) Ferry was not achieved.

b) Construction of Sigulu Ferry not achieved

c) Output for Rehabilitation of Old Bukakata Ferry was not achieved.

Funds were spent on machinery and equipment that were not related to the output in question.

The output was partially completed as indicated in the details below:

Mpondwe Bridge: There was delayed formal response by DRC government regarding giving a go-ahead to start works on DRC side.

Multi Cell Box Culvert at Ajeleik: After excavation to the required design depth, soil strata not coin- ciding with the MoWT design report was encoun- tered. This led to re-assessment of foundation options.

Aji and Ora Bridges: There was a delay by the Contractor to submit an acceptable Draft Detailed Design Report.

Enyau Bridge: Delay by the Contractor to submit an acceptable Draft Detailed Design Report. Delays in acquiring Right of Way for the re-aligned bridge and approach roads.

However it was difficult to attach a cost per bridge as it had not been provided for in the workplan.

22

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











From the analysis, out of fifteen (15) sampled planned outputs, UNRA was able to fully achieve two (2)

and partially achieve four (4). A total of nine (9) outputs were not achieved/implemented.

As indicated in Table 7 above, quite a number of project outputs were not fully implemented majorly due to weaknesses in planning, resource constraints where I noted that UNRA is facing challenges of

exchange rates fluctuations that also affected the allocated funds; Inadequate budget allocations to

cover the Authority financing needs; Taking on new projects without a proportionate increase in funding and diversion of the released funds. Examples include:

• The Transport Corridor project where UGX.55.07billion was not spent on planned activities, but

diverted towards other activities.

• Kampala flyover project where UGX.10.33billion (includes GoU and development partner

funding) was released but not spent on the planned output. Further more despite the launch of the Kampala Flyover project in December 2018, the physical project works are yet to

commence.

• Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko road where UGX.93.45 billion was released but not spent on the planned output. The Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko road is a project under pre-financing and would

therefore not be able to absorb the allocated funds in its early stages of implementation.

Additionally, it was noted that the oil roads lacked financing agreements and could therefore

not commence despite the release of the funds.

- New Ferry to replace Kabalega project where UGX.9 billion was released but not spent on the intended output.



The challenge of project implementation delays was also highlighted in the assessmemt

undertaken by NPA. The review of the the Certificate of Compliance 2018/19 shows that, of the projects under implementation save for the Transport Corridor project, 74% were behind schedule while 26%

were on schedule. For the 30 projects clustered under the Transport Corridor project, 29% had we not commenced, 31% were at feasibility stage, 19% were under implementation but behind schedule, 6%

under implementation were on schedule and only 15% completed. Some of the completed projects

included; Kampala-Mukono-Jinja; Migera-Kafu, Pakwach-Nebbi and Hima-Katunguru among others.

Some of the outputs should have been completed by 2017/18 and exited the Public Investment Plan,

but are still under implementation in the current budget. These include; Kapchorwa-Suam road;

Upgrading of Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba; Kampala Norther Bypass Phase 2; and Upgrading Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo-Afoji road.

Through further analysis, it was observed that UNRA faces unique challenges in that the annual

allocations always fall short of its total annual funding requirements for road development and

maintainance partly caused by the Authority taking on new projects without a proportionate increment in funding. This has also created a challenge of accumulation of arrears. By spreading the limited resources too wide, implementation the budget to deliver the planned

outputs in a timely manner becomes a challenge.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 23 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











4.1.3 Uganda Railways Corporation

I reviewed URC’s performance reports together with the relevant supporting documents and established that

there were no progress reports to support the performance achieved. Most of the planned outputs in the URC budget and workplans had no funds that had been directly allocated to them. This rendered assessment of

delivery of expected outputs difficult. Table 8 below summarizes the results of the review of the implementa-

tion of the selected sample of key priorities planned by the corporation.

Table 8: Delivery of Planned outputs for URC.

Department	Planned Output*	Amount “Billion”	Implementation	Audit Remarks	
Maintenance of estates and station buildings	Warehouses at Good-Shed and Port Bell.	Budget: 1 Spent: 0.304	Partially Achieved	Warehouses at Good-Shed and Port Bell were partially completed.The Guard house, toilet block, drive way, pave- ments and fencing were carried out at both Good shed and Portbell.	
	Renovation of Kenya Houses	Budget: 1 Spent: 0.2	Partially Achieved	The activity was partially completed. This was contracted to a property agent who started reno- vation works in October 2018. Only one unit was renovated by the time of the audit.The other unit was not renovated due to non availability of funds.	
Spot Improvement of mainline, rehabilita- tion of port bell line and requirement for rehabilitation of Northern line.	Spot improve- ments of main line re-rail 10km with new mate- rial.	Budget: 12.4 Spent: 5.2	Partially Achieved	Spot improvement of main line re-rail 10km with new material was partially achieved.Drainage at Magamaga and Budumbuli Namanve completed. The ballasts were purchased but not fixed.This was mainly attributable to the low funding towards the corporation.	
	Re-railing of Jinja Pier Line	Budget: 2.1 Spent: 0	Not Achieved	This output was not achieved. No funds were allocated to this output.	
	Erection of boundary mark- ers Phase IV	Budget: 1 Spent: 0.391	Achieved	This output was achieved. Erection of boundary markers was implemented through reinforce- ment of 1,088 concrete railway reserve boundary.However, I noted an unrealistic budget amount that had been allocated as this output was achieved with the 39% of the budget being released for this output.	




24

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Planned Amount Department Implementation Audit Remarks Output* “Billion”

This output was not achieved.

Rehabilitation of Budget: 11.25 150 wagons

Purchase of roll- ing stock, motor vehicles and other equipment, includes Leasing of 6

Budget: 6.98

wagon hire chares locomotives

Spent: 1.29 and locomotives

Leasing of 200 Budget: 8.21 wagons

10 wagons were reported to be under rehabilita- tion without any budget allocations. These 10 Not Achieved wagons were not part of the earlier planned 150 wagons.

The rehabilitation of 150 wagons in one year appeared unrealistic.

The output for Leasing 6 locomotives was partially completed. Brake blocks were purchased.

Partially Achieved I noted inconsistences in the workplan which showed 6 locomotives while the performance report indicated that 3 locomotives were to be leased.

This output was not achieved. Not Achieved This was due to limitation of funds.

Re-manufacture of locomotives

Source: OAG Analysis.

Budget:8.75 Not Achieved

This output was not achieved. This was attributable to limitation of funds.

Table 8 indicates that the Corporation was able to achieve one (1) output out of the nine (9) sampled

outputs. Four (4) outputs were partially achieved and four (4) were not achieved.

Furthermore, whereas URC obtained funding to a tune of UGX.26.57billion in the year under review as indicated in the audited financial statements, it was difficult to obtain expenditure per planned output as well as linking the planned output to the activity. This was due to the fact that Management did not provide separate costing for each output in their work plan and budget.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 25 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











4.1.4 Uganda Road Fund

Through the review of URF’s performance reports together with the relevant supporting documents, I

established that whereas some of the outputs were set and clearly quantified, there were no monitoring reports to support the level of achievement in terms of kilometres of roads reported to have been

mantained. The returns expected from the districts which benefit from the programme were also not

available.

This rendered assessment of the level of achievement under the road maintenance programme

difficult.Table 9 below summarizes the results of the review of the implementation of the selected

sample of key priorities planned by the entity.

Table 9: Delivery of Planned Output for URF.

Vote Function	Planned outputs	Amount (Billions)	Actual Outputs - as per Performance Report	Audit Remarks - Achievement of planned outputs	Audit Remarks	
045251 National Road Mainte- nance	Street lighting on 50km	Budget: 312.56 Released: 312.5 Spent: 312.5	street lighting of 50km	Achieved	The output was achieved. Street lighting on 50km were installed.	
	10 fixed and 10 mobile weighbridges to be operated		8 fixed and 4 mobile weigh bridges	Partially Achieved	The output was partially achieved. 2 weigh bridges out of 10 were fixed and 4 mobile weigh bridges out of 10 were fixed.However, whereas these had been fixed they were not in operation.	
	337 bridges Routine mechanized maintenance		Maintenance of 337 No. bridges	Unable to confirm	I was unable to confirm the above output. It was diffi- cult to verify the outputs as there were no monitoring reports presented to support the reported performance.	
	Routine mechanized maintenance of 1,762km paved and 10,185km unpaved Roads		Routine mechanized paved 1,762km and unpaved 10,185km of National roads.	Unable to confirm	I was unable to confirm the above output.No reports were presented in support of the perfor- mance	
	financed 13 ferries operations and maintenance		Financed mainte- nance and operation of 9 ferries	Partially Achieved	The output was partially achieved. Financing of 9 ferries operations and maintenance was com- pleted.URF did not finance main- tenance and operation of 4 ferries. Reports were also not presented.	
045252 District, Urban and Community Access Road Maintenance	Installation of 6,456 culvert lines		Installation of 5,781 Culvert lines	Partially Achieved	The activity was partially completed. 5,106 culverts installed.	




26

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Vote Function	Planned outputs	Amount (Billions)	Actual Outputs - as per Performance Report	Audit Remarks - Achievement of planned outputs	Audit Remarks	
045252 District, Urban and Community Access Road Maintenance	Routine Manual Maintenance of 23,581 km of un- paved roads	Budget: 214.73 Release: 214.84 Spent: 214.69	Routine manual maintenance of 26,264 km	Unable to confirm	I was unable to confirm the above output.Whereas the performance report indicates that it per- formed more than expect- ed, there were no monitor- ing reports to support the reported achievement.	
	Periodic mainte- nance of 6.66 km paved city roads		Periodic maintenance on 4.84km of paved KCCA	Partially Achieved	The output was partially achieved.Out of the 6.66km planned for paved KCCA, 4.84km were maintained.The 1.82km were not main- tained as planned.	
	Routine Mainte- nance 453.10 km KCCA unpaved roads		Routine Maintenance 305 km unpaved KCCA roads	Unable to confirm	I was unable to confirm the above output.There were no monitor- ing reports to support this performance as stated by the entity.	
	Periodic mainte- nance of 2,300km on paved/unpaved Municipal Council Roads		Periodic maintenance of 2,280.82km of Municipal roads	Unable to confirm	I was unable to confirm the above output.There no monitoring re- ports from which these km were derived and therefore rendering the achievement doubtful.	
	Routine mechanized maintenance of 12,779km of District roads		Routine Mechanized maintenance of 12,779km of district roads	Unable to confirm	I was unable to confirm the above output.There no monitoring reports to support the the achievement reported.	
045272 Government Buildings and Administra- tive Infrastruc- ture	25% of URF/PPDA office premise constructed	Budget: 6.00 Release: 4.70 Spent: 4.7	Construction of base- ment and ground floor completed	Partially Achieved	The construction of base- ment and ground floor was completed.However, the 25% was not defined as to what it entails, as much as funds were budgeted and released.	




Source: OAG Analysis.

Table 9 indicates that URF was able to achieve one (1) output out of the twelve (12) sampled outputs. Five (5) outputs were partially achieved and six (6) were not achieved.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 27

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











4.1.5 Civil Aviation Authority

A review of the CAA strategic plan, business plan and approved budget estimates and performance reports for the sampled projects revealed that the highest number of outputs was not achieved as planned due to lack of prioritisation of the activities and counter part funding from GoU.

Whereas Management had funds that were not utilized and subsequently invested a total of UGX90bn on fixed

deposit accounts as surplus funds, several of the planned activities for the year were not allocated funds for implementation.Table 10 below refers.

Table 10: Delivery of Planned outputs for CAA

Program	Planned output	Amount (Billion)	Implementation	Audit Remarks	
Airport planning and development Airport planning and coordination	Improvement of departures	Budget: 15 Spent: 15	Partially Achieved	The activity was partially completed. Partial works were done and the project received additional funding of UGX.6.149 which was not fully utilized as the project slowed down in the year under review due to change in designs.	
	CCTV for cargo Center	Budget:1.5 Spent: 0	Not Achieved	There were no funds allocated to this activity.	
	Search Park EIA	Budget: 3.5 Spent: 1.1	Partially Achieved	The activity was partially achieved. The project works were 60% complete. Relocation of under- ground services and the rainy season interrupted with the progress of works	
	Supervision of airport expan- sion project	Budget: 7.5 Spent: 7.5	Achieved	This activity was achieved. Supervision of airport expansion project at EIA was achieved.	
Electrical, Electronic and mechanical	Overhaul of obsolete 11kv EIA Main Power Supply Ring Phase 3	Budget: 1.8 Spent: 0	Not Achieved	This activity was not completed. Funds were not availed for this output.	
Marine Search and Rescue	Rebuilding and modification of crumbling 2piers (Phase 1)	Budget: 1.4 Spent: 0	Not Achieved	This activity was not implemented.Project was still at specification and development stage. At that time, the piers were being main- tained under the certification budget.	
Government Support	Security search park shelter, equipment, civil infrastructure and electrical works	Budget: 68.22 Spent: 0	Partially Achieved	This activity was partially achieved. The civil works for the search park by IBB Inter- national is in advanced stage of completion. The civil works were almost completed. However, the facility may not be put to use because of the required screening equipment which were yet to be procured. Funds were obtained from other Authority areas to deliver the output.	
	Perimeter secu- rity lighting and Defense system	Budget: 11.52 Spent: 0	Not Achieved	The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.	
	Security elec- tronic surveil- lance system	Budget: 7.866 Spent: 0	Not Achieved	The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.	




28

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Program Planned output Amount (Billion) Implementation

Security screen- Budget: 9 ing and scan- Not Achieved Spent: 0 ning equipment

Security integrated Budget: 4.32 Not Achieved communication Spent: 0 equipment

Access control Budget: 3.96 Not Achieved system Spent: 0

Security inte- grated Manage- Budget: 4.5 Government support Not Achieved ment building Spent: 0 system

Security Equip- Budget: 15 ment for cargo Not Achieved Spent: 0 center

Security Light- ing of the Budget: 12 Not Achieved perimeter fence Spent: 0 at EIA

Improvement of security and Budget: 1.2 Not Achieved street lighting Spent: 0 at EIA

Land Acquisi- Budget: 50 Not Achieved tion Spent: 0

Audit Remarks

The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.

The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.

The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.

The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.

The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.

The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.

The actitity was not implemented. The govern- ment support did not come through as had been planned. The entity has decided to phase these activities within their budget.

The actitity was not implemented. There were no funds availed for land acquisition.

Others

The activity was partially achieved. Airport Expan- Partially imple- Slow project progress was observed during the Budget: 216 sion Project mented audit. Annexture 1 refers

Source: OAG own Analysis.

Table 10 indicates that the Authority did not achieve most of its key planned outputs. Out of the eighteen

(18) sampled outputs, the Authority partially achieved three (3) while fifteen (15) were not achieved.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 29 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











4.2

FACTORS IMPACTING ON PERFORMANCE

Through document review, detailed analysis and interviews, the audit identified a number of factors that

impacted on the achievement of the planned outputs for the sector. Discussed below are some of the contributing factors arising from the review of the process of planning, budgeting, funds release and utilization; monitoring and evaluation; and performance reporting.

4.2.1 Planning and Budgeting

The Public Finance Management Act 2015, Section 13 (1) and (2) requires preparation of a National Budget in consultation with stakeholders. Section 13 (6) requires that the annual budget is consistent with the National

Development Plan. This alignment also ensures accurate reporting of the outputs and outcomes planned in the NDPII at sector and MDA planning level.

As observed by the OAG in the audit report on budget performance (2017/18), the Sector Development Plan

was in tandem with the long-term National Development goals and objectives of the sector.

However, there were cases where output indicators were not quantified as indicated in Table 11 below especially in the case of CAA and URC. This made assessment of performance difficult.

Table 11: Quantification of outputs

SDP Output indicator	MoWT	CAA	URC	UNRA	URF	
- Proportion of freight cargo by mode of travel: Railway, Road, Water and Air.- Proportion of functional railway network.	- No of policies, laws, guidelines, plans & strategies amended.- 50% driving schools inspected.- Five road safety awareness cam- paigns conducted. Fifty thousand vehicles inspected for road worthi- ness.- Number of air- crafts maintained.- Hectares of right of way acquired.- Design for devel- opment of Bukasa Port completed.	- Improvement of departures.- Supervision of airport expansion.- Security Lighting of the perimeter fence at Entebbe International Airport.	- Warehouse at Good-shed and Port Bell.- Spot improvement of main line re-rail 10km with new materials.- Re-railing of Jinja Pier Line.- Erection of bound- ary markers Phase IV.- Rehabilitation of 150 wagons.- Leasing of 6 loco- motives.- Leasing of 200 wagons.- Re-manufacture of locomotives.	- Km Equivalent of roads constructed.- No of bridges constructed/recon- structed.- Km equivalent of roads rehabilitated.- No of ferries added to network.- Hectares of land acquired for road and bridge con- struction projects.- Km of paved roads.	- % of approved annual budget released for main- tenance of national roads.- % of funds released to UNRA on time.- Average time of disbursements from date of receipt of MoFPED releases.	




Source: Monitoring and Evaluation Framework for Works and Transport Sector pg 16-18 and pages 61-68.

30

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











There were aslo inconsistencies highlighted in the Certificate of Compliance report 2018/19 issued

by NPA where it was indicated that the Works and Transport Sector indicators and targets in the Development Plan and budget instruments still vary from those in the NDPII. For instance, the NDPII target for construction and rehabilitation of national road network was 4,977 for 2018/19 but 4,457 were indicated in the National Budget Framework Paper.

Similarly, the NDPII target for the local motor-vehicle inspection scheme was 600,000 vehicles while

the MPS indicated 50,000 vehicles.

Through interviews and document review, the audit team established that these omissions are partly

caused by weaknesses in the planning function of the various sector entities. In a number of entities, the planning function has not been prioritized or adequately facilitated in terms

of staffing and funding to enable the department perform its function effectively. Presented in Table 12

below is the budget allocation for planning and budgeting activities under the various entities.

Table 12: Budget Allocations for Planning Activities

Entity	Budget Amount (Ugx ‘billion)	Release Amount (UGX.’Billion)	Amount Spent (UGX.’Billion)	
MoWT	0.32	0.29	0.29	
UNRA	0	0	0	
CAA	0.752*	0	0.752	
URF	0	0	0	
URC	0	0	0	
Total	1.072	0.29	0.29	




Source: OAG own Analysis. *Figures obtained from the budget 18/19 (Pg.130)

The analysis in Table 12 above shows that only two entities within the sector namely: MOWT and CAA

have clearly defined budgets for planning and budgeting activities. The rest of the entities in the sector

did not provide specific allocations for planning function.

Management Response

MoWT Response - On the issue of harmonization of the Ministry targets in the MPS with the NDPII, the ministry is engaging MoFPED in liaison with OPM so that the sector targets are in

agreement with the National Indicators. In addition, the Ministry has engaged MoFPED to increase

its budget ceilings to accommodate the prioritized institutional interventions as out lined in NDPII. Therefore, implementation of these interventions remains unfunded.

URC Response - The Corporation’s outputs were quantified. Quantification of outputs is always

followed up by the Ministry of Works and Transport on a quarterly basis. Although URC indicated that the entity outputs were quantified, records show that there were a number

of outputs that were not quantified.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 31 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Conclusion

There were instances where some of the sector entity indicators are not properly aligned to the sector development plan indicators and in addition, some of the entity targets were not measurable making it difficult to track the progress of the sector and entity outcome in a given year. The failure to prioritize the planning function may lead to half haphazard implementation and limitations in tracking the implemented activities.

Recommendation

The Sector entities should:

- Ensure proper alignment of the entity outputs with the sector outputs.

• Ensure that the planning function is prioritized with adequate resources to enable it operate effectively. In addition the resources earmarked for planning should be utilized for the intended

purposes.

4.2.2 Release Performance and Absorption

In the Financial year 2018/19, the sector budgeted for a total of UGX 4,907.366 billion to enable it undertake its planned activities in line with the Sector Development plan. During the year, UGX.4,768.625 billion was

received and UGX.4,372.981 billion spent as shown in Table 13 below.

Table 13: Budget, Release, and Expenditure/Absorption of funds.

Details/Entity	MoWT in UGX billion	UNRA in UGX billion	URF in UGX billion	CAA in UGX billion	URC in UGX billion	Total in UGX billion	
GOU	370.810	1,612.7	542.517	0	38.8	2,564.83	
External Financing	425.382	1,419.1	0	0	0	1,844.48	
Recurrent	78.606	98.614	0	0	0	177.22	
Other Revenue	0	0	0	234.137	86.6	320.737	
Approved total budget (Billion)	874.798	3,130.414	542.617	234.137	125.4	4,907.366	
Release/Revenue Realised (Billion)	1,059.217	2,886.4	540.966	248.198	33.844	4,768.625	
Variance (Amount not released/realised)	(184.419)	244.014	1.550	(14.06)	91.556	138.641	
% Release/Revenue compared to budget	121.1%	92%	99%	106%	27%	97%	
Amount Spent (Billion)	1,008.253	2,590.375	540.9	158.851	74.602	4,372.981	
Amount not absorbed (Billion)	50.964	296.025	0.321	77.486	0	424.796	
%spent compared to release	95.2%	89%	100%	64%	(220)%	92%	




Source: OAG Analysis of approved budget, released amount.

32

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











As shown in Table 13 above, out of the approved sector budget of UGX 4,907.366 , a total of UGX.4,768.625

billion was released or realized (representing 97% of the approved budget); and UGX.4,372.981 billion

was spent (representing 92% of the amount realized In terms of revenue /release performance, it was observed that inspite of the good sector revenue performance (97%), for most of the sector entities,

URC realized only 27% of its budget as reflected in Table 13. The low performance was attributed to

shortfalls registered in various revenue sources, as shown in Table 14 below;

Table 14: Showing Revenue Collection for URC

Revenue Source	Approved Budget UGX (000)	Actual receipts UGX (000)	Variance UGX (000)	Percentage variance	Audit Comments	
Rent and rates non- produced assets from private entities	2,228,532	1,239,357	989,176	44.4	Failure to collect all rent dues.	
Freight services	82,762,535	13,950,839	68,811,697	83.1	Lack of vessels to carry export cargo, low customer confidence due to accidents on the main line and in Kenya.	
Passenger services	480,000	543,070	(63,070)	13.1	The passenger trains are on high demand by the public which increased the expected revenue.	
Other fees and charges	1,138,962	847,702	291,261	25.6		
Transfers received from other govern- ment units	38,770,000	9,780,000	28,990,000	74.8	Budget cuts by the govern- ment.	
Investment income	0	514,731	(514,731)	100		
Total	125,380,029	26,875,699	99,659,935	79.5%		




Source: OAG Analysis of revenue collection.

From Table 14 above, almost 80% of the expected revenue was not realized by URC and this greatly

affected the achievement of its planned outputs. The major reason for non-realization of the expected

revenue was mainly failure to collect the expected rental revenue lack of vessels to carry export cargo

and low customer confidence due to accidents on the main line in Kenya.

In terms of sector absorption, it was observed that 92% of the released amount /revenue realized was spent as indicated in (Table 13) above.

As earlier explained the low absorption by UNRA was a result of appropriation of funds to projects whose

financing agreements had not been finalized. For example UGX.228.4 billion was appropriated for the

critical oil roads before the loan was approved; UGX.79.7 billion was also appropriated for Muyembe- Nakapiripirit and Rwenkunye-Apac yet the loans had expired and were still under re-negotiations.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 33 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Management Response

UNRA Response - MoFPED allocated MTEF to UNRA expecting that financing agreements would be finalized

in the course of the financial year. In the current year, UNRA advised MoFPED not to allocate budget where

financing agreements have not been finalized as a mitigation measure for projects without financing agreements.

URC Response - The underperformance on revenue budgeted is attributed to factors mainly outside URC’s control. Such factors include: Lack of fuel in Kenya led to failure to load and deliver cargo in time which consequently reduced freight income; Tanzania Railways Corporation undertook rehabilitation works of the meter gauge railway during the year. The line would only be opened twice a week to allow for trains to pass.

This reduced the number of trains delivered and the volume of cargo went down drastically.

Conclusion

Overall, the planned budgetary allocations especially from government were realized by the sector entities.

However there was a significant shortfall in terms of revenue collection at entity level specifically for URC.

Recommendations



- The Management of UNRA should liaise with MOFPED to ensure that funds are appropriated for only those projects whose financing agreements have been finalized and are ready for implementation.

• The Management of UNRA should ensure that the financing agreements are expedited for those

projects whose financing has been agreed or made available.

- URC should devise mechanisms of raising its annual revenues to ensure sustainability of its operations.



This will require that management re-assesses its business model and come with a clear plan for the

successful operation of the business, identifying sources of revenue, the intended customer base, products, and details of financing

4.2.3 Diversion of Funds

The Parliament of Uganda appropriates funds in accordance with the needs of the country and this appropriation is implemented through the approved budget in which funds are tagged to particular

activities and outputs using account codes and MTEF codes.

The review of the expenditure of sector entities and the respective budget codes revealed instances of diversion of funds to budget lines with no relation to the planned output in question. For the sampled

outputs, it was established that UGX. 342,612,614,863 was diverted from the planned outputs towards other

activities without authority from the planned outputs towards other activities. A breakdown of the above amount is indicated in Table 15 below. Breakdown in Appendix 2; Appendix 3; Appendix 4 respectively.

34

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











As shown in Table 13 above, out of the approved sector budget of UGX 4,907.366 , a total of UGX.4,768.625

billion was released or realized (representing 97% of the approved budget); and UGX.4,372.981 billion

was spent (representing 92% of the amount realized In terms of revenue /release performance, it was observed that inspite of the good sector revenue performance (97%), for most of the sector entities,

URC realized only 27% of its budget as reflected in Table 13. The low performance was attributed to

shortfalls registered in various revenue sources, as shown in Table 15 below;

Table 15: Showing Revenue Collection for URC

Entity	Amount Diverted (UGX)	
MoWT	1,050,532,082	
UNRA	341,241,512,345	
URF	320,570,436	
Total	342,612,614,863	




Source: OAG Analysis.

This impacted on the financing of the activities resulting in some activities not being implemented as

shown in 4.1.1- 4.1.5 (Implementation of planned outputs).

Management Response

MoWT Response - MoWT is putting in place various administrative controls including adjusting the

approved Work plans whenever we receive directives to carry out unplanned activities and seeking

re-allocations to accommodate expenditures on the relevant items and sticking to the commitment control system.

UNRA Response - Out of UGX.341billion, UGX. 285.8 billion which is 84% of the mischarged funds was

GOU counterpart funding of Critical Oil Roads but the financing agreement with EXIM Bank China had

not been signed by year-end.

In addition, UNRA did not receive sufficient funds for the ongoing projects and funds were utilized to settle certificates of these projects to avoid interest charges estimated at UGX. 26.26 Billion. This was

because of a small MTEF that had been allocated for ongoing works, which resulted in accumulation of debt.

For the other projects that did not absorb the allocated funds of UGX. 90 Billion due to delayed procurement, the funds were also utilized to pay accumulated certificates of projects that were underfunded because of small allocated MTEF.

URF Response - The diversion arose for various reasons during the budget implementation process. The Performance Budgeting System (PBS) is a tool used in planning in any given year. This advocates for activity based budgeting which calls for a task being broken down and costed under activities.

This brings a challenge during execution where narratives to an activity automatically qualify as a

mischarge. However going forward we have ensured that all expenditure lines are well budgeted and

budget control is adhered to.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 35 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Conclusion

Over 7% of the sector release was utilized on activities not intended for the year under review. This impacted on the achievement of planned outputs as indicated in paragraph 4.1.1 -4.1.5.

Recommendation

Diversion of funds should be avoided as it impacts on the implementation of planned activities. Where budget variations are inevitable, reallocations should be sought in accordance with the financial regulations.

4.2.4 Timeliness of the procurement process

According to the budget execution circular of the FY 2018/19 Paragraph 9, Accounting Officers are required

to embark on program/project procurement and recruitment activities as early as possible to minimize cost

overruns and delayed procurements for FY 2018/2019. Furthermore, Accounting Officers were advised to

initiate procurement and contracting upon confirmation of availability of funds as per the approved procurement plans for FY 2018/2019.

In addition, Section 48 of the PPDA Act, 2003 requires that all procurement and disposal should be conducted in a manner which promotes economy, efficiency and value for money.

According to the procurement timelines prescribed by the procurement regulations, it was established that

an entity would require utmost sixty (60) days - (2 Months) to complete the procurement process for any given

service.

On the contrary, it was noted that a lot of time was lost between initiation of procurement and contract signing. The time taken for any given procurement exceeded the sixty (60) days before a contract is signed.

The delays ranged from 30 days to almost 4 years as indicated in Appendix 5.

Management Response

CAA Response - Some procurements required additional funding which was unavailable and this led to delays

in finalization of several procurements. In some cases relating to civil works, there were changes to designs which led to significant delays and alteration in procurement processes. Further, for activities that required

compensation of project affected persons, delays were experienced in the survey process.

Conclusion

Delays in the procurement process were observed. These delays impacted on the timely implementation of

activities.

Recommendation

The sector should ensure that procurements are undertaken within the timelines prescribed in the procurement regulations. This will also require establishment of a mechanism to routinely monitor the

time taken throughout all the procurement processes.

36

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











4.2.5 Monitoring and evaluation of implemented activities The Budget Execution Circular FY 2018/2019 provides that all Ministries, Departments, Agencies

and Local Governments should submit annual monitoring plans for Government programs and/ or

projects under each vote to Office of the Prime Minister with a copy to Ministry of Finance, Planning and

Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and National Planning Authority for harmonization to ensure proper coordination to avoid duplication and fatigue; and quarterly

monitoring reports to Office of the Prime Minister with a copy to Ministry of Finance, Planning and

Economic Development for attention of the Director Budget. Additionally, to ensure effective

monitoring of the sector, the Ministry has developed the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework Policy

for the Works and Transport Sector.

As noted in the 2017/18 Budget Performance report, the sector has quite a number of indicators used

to monitor and assess performance. These included: Golden Indicators; GAPR Indicators; and the National Partnership Forum Indicators. All these have got clear targets for assessing performance of

the sector.

However through interviews, it was noted that although all programs and projects develop specific

indicators for assessment of performance, the entities lacked monitoring and evaluation tools such as specific work plans with clear set targets and verifiable performance indicators to facilitate routine data collection, analysis and display and reporting of information on the progress of implementation.

Furthermore, it was established that whereas the Ministry of Works and Transport had budgeted for UGX.2.29 billion and spent UGX.2.17 billion on monitoring and evaluation activities, there were no

specific monitoring reports on file to confirm that the expected monitoring and evaluation activities

were carried out and/or recommendations for corrective action were made. The entity planning team

indicated that monitoring was being undertaken on adhoc basis.

On the other hand, UNRA had a fully fledged Monitoring and Evaluation department. However the department lacked an M&E framework or policy to guide the monitoring and evaluation activities.

Monitoring and evaluation is instead undertaken from time to time on project basis.

In the case of CAA the monitoring and evaluation component is under the department of Strategic

Planning. I noted that the Authority also lacked a monitoring and evaluation framework to guide

monitoring.

Management Response

MoWT Response - The Ministry acknowledges the gaps in its M&E function. In order to strengthen its

M&E capacity, the Ministry has created an M&E Division under the new structure, and recruitment of staff is on-going. The new M&E Division is expected to be fully operational during FY 2019/20 and will

address the currents gaps in M&E.

CAA Response - The Consultancy to develop an M&E framework for the Authority has been budgeted for in the FY 2020/2021. .

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 37 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Conclusion

The existing gaps in the M&E function in the sector impede proper functioning of the M&E functions. This

means that performance gaps in the delivery of planned outputs cannot be timely identified and corrected.

Recommendation

The Sector Entities should develop M&E systems with clear administrative and institutional tasks for

establishing data collection, analysis and reporting guidelines. The sector entities should designate staff

who will be responsible for M&E activities, establishing means of quality control, establishing timelines and

costs, establishing guidelines on transparency and dissemination of information and analysis among others. In addition teams should be constituted to generate monthly and quarterly reports on the performance of

the Programmes/ Projects with recommendations for corrective action so as to facilitate evidence based

decision making.

4.2.6 Performance Reporting

According to Section 2 (f) of the PFMA, 2015 the following accounts shall be submitted to the Accountant

General by an Accounting Officer a statement of performance, signed by the Accounting Officer,

indicating each class of outputs provided during the year, which shall compare the performance with the forecast of the performance contained in the estimates laid before Parliament under section 13(15) (b); and give the particulars of the extent to which the performance criteria specified in that estimate in relation to

the provision of those outputs was satisfied. In addition, the budget execution circular 2018/19 required Accounting Officers to submit quarterly budget performance reports clearly indicating the actual

performance against the planned outputs and performance for each quarter showing the quality/quantity and physical location of the reported outputs against expenditure using the format in the Program Based Budgeting System (PBBS). 2

Analysis of the sector financial performance per entity indicated the following discrepancies in reporting.

Table 16 refers.

Table 16: Showing Revenue Collection for URC

Details/Entity	MoWT (UGX Bn)		UNRA (UGX Bn)		CAA (UGX Bn)		URC (UGX Bn)		URF (UGX Bn)		
	SPR (UGX)	FS (UGX)	SPR (UGX)	SPR (UGX)	FS (UGX)	SPR (UGX)	FS (UGX)	SPR (UGX)	FS (UGX)	SPR (UGX)	
Total Approved Budget Figures	874.8	874.8	3,442.9	3,442.9	236.3	234.137	125.3	125.3	542.6	540.9	
Released Amount	1,010.2	1,059.217	2,886.4	2,886.4		248.198	32.6	26.57	541	540.9	
Amount Spent	1,008.2	1,008.253	2,562.9	2,590.37	541	158.851	32.6	74.6	540.9	540.9	
Revenue Collected							26.8	17.6			




Source: SPR-Sector Performance Report; FS-Financial Statement.

Table 16 above shows inconsistences in the figures reported in the sector performance report and those in the financial statements of the entities as at 30th June 2019. Additionally a review of the sector budget

performance report and the entity budget performance reports on implementation of planned activities also

revealed inconsistences in the reported performance of the quantifiable outputs as indicated in Appendix 6.

The inconsistencies are a result of lack of a mechanism for validating the performation information reported by the entities.

2 Paragraph 65 of the Budget Execution Circular FY 2017/18

38

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Management Response

The MoWT wrote to MoFPED regarding inadequate MTEF for FY 2019/20, budget cuts/ re-allocations made by Parliament and their implications on the implementation of NDPII flagship projects. These

cuts led to inconsistences in the various areas in the budget and performance reports.

Conclusion

The existing gaps in the M&E function in the sector impede proper functioning of the M&E functions. This means that performance gaps in the delivery of planned outputs cannot be timely identified and

corrected.

Recommendation

The Sector Entities should develop M&E systems with clear administrative and institutional tasks for

establishing data collection, analysis and reporting guidelines. The sector entities should designate

staff who will be responsible for M&E activities, establishing means of quality control, establishing

timelines and costs, establishing guidelines on transparency and dissemination of information and analysis among others.

In addition teams should be constituted to generate monthly and quarterly reports on the performance

of the Programmes/ Projects with recommendations for corrective action so as to facilitate evidence

based decision making.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 39 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











APPENDICES:

Appendix 1: Budget Execution Process

Process Point Process Description

Planning Performance Indicator Setting and Validation At the start of the budget planning calendar, MDAs are required to review the existing performance indicators for each output/outcome for use in the forthcoming financial year. MDAs then submit the validated indicators to the sector secretariats at the lead ministry for compilation and submission to the relevant desk officers at OPM for quality assurance. At OPM, the desk officers specifically check for relevancy; completeness; obsolete and missing indicators and mismatch of indicators as part of the quality control procedures. OPM then summons the National Monitoring and Evaluation Working Group (OPM, UBoS, NPA, and MoFPED) to review and submit the approved performance indicators to Budget Directorate of MoFPED for incorporation within the National budget and the budget reporting tool (Programme Budgeting System (PBS) formerly the Output budgeting tool (OBT)). The sector desk officers are required to upload the approved performance indicators by 15th November of the current financial year. The approval of the indicators is based on ensuring that the indicators are specific, measurable, achievable, reliable and timely, i.e. SMART beginning with the OPM desk officers and completed by the National Monitor- ing and Evaluation Working Group.

Target Setting MDAs are required to set the targets in line with the available resource envelope and capacity to implement the development objectives of the institution. The MDAs set the output/outcome indicator targets during the budget framework paper preparation process. The targets are further reviewed during the preparation of the ministerial policy statement by the MDA in line with the appropriated resources. The set targets are forwarded to OPM for review and approval, and re-forwarded to MFPED for input into the OBT/PBS.

Budgeting

Each Accounting Officer in consultation with the relevant stakeholders prepares a Budget Framework Paper for the vote, taking into consideration balanced development, gender and equity responsiveness and submits it to the Minister by 15 th November of the financial year preceding the financial year to which the Budget Framework Paper relates. The Budget Framework Paper is supposed to be consistent with the National Development Plan and with the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. The Minister, with the approval of Cabinet, submits the Budget Framework Paper to Parliament by the 31 st of December of the financial year proceeding the financial year to which the Budget Framework Paper relates. After consideration of the BFPs by parliament, entities also present to parliament their proposed budgets (Ministerial Policy Statements) which are then discussed by the relevant committees as part of the budget approval process. Approval of the budget is evidenced through the enactment of the Appropriation Act by Parliament.

Budget Implementation Release of Funds After approval of the Budget Estimates by Parliament in May, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, issues a Budget Execution Calendar in June. The execution calendar communicates the Annual Quarterly Cash flow plan and the Operational and Administrative guidelines for budget implementation. The release of funds to Votes is undertaken in accordance with the cash flow plans and through a warranting process managed by the Accountant General and the Directorate of Budget. The MDAs are however advised to hold regular internal meetings to review the status of implementation of approved work plans from time to time. The meetings include Departmental meetings, Directorate meetings, Senior Management Meetings and Top Management Meetings.

Utilization of Funds After approval of the annual budget by Parliament, the Secretary to Treasury issues the annual cash flow plan of Government, based on the procurement plans, work plans and recruitment plans approved by Parliament. The annual cash flow plan forms the basis for release of funds by the Accountant General to the Accounting Officers. The Accounting Officer, based on the annual cash flow plan issued by the Secretary to the Treasury, plans and manages the activities as indicated in the policy statement of the vote. An Accounting Officer is charged with the overall responsibility for the successful execution of the procurement, disposal and contract management processes in the procuring and disposing entity.

Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Minister to reallocate funds from a vote to another vote where the functions of a vote are transferred to that other vote. A vote that does not expend money that was ap- propriated to the vote for the financial year at the close of the financial year is expected to repay the money to the Consolidated Fund.

40

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Process Point	Process Description	
Monitoring and Evaluation	To ensure effective monitoring of the national health strategy, the MoH developed the M&E plan for the HSDP with clear indicators and targets for assessing performance and ensure availability of accurate and timely information on health sector performance. All programs and projects are also expected to develop specific program/project M&E work plans which should include programme indicators to measure process, outputs and immediate outcomes. These should, however, be aligned with the goal, objectives and strategic interventions of the HSDP to demonstrate the effects of health system strengthening to health outcomes.At the national level, Bi-annual internal reviews by Sector Working Groups are carried out and include collating input and output performance data for key results as defined in Sector Investment Plans and the sector reporting framework. The bi-annual review includes all relevant sector stakeholders. The review focuses on the timeliness and accuracy of the collated performance data, before its upwards reporting, and recommendations for any corrective measures in the coming half year are made.In addition to public institutions and executing agencies, citizens, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and Development Partners (DPs) play a role in the monitoring and evaluation of Government’s performance. These institutions provide an external perspective on Government performance and results; assist Government through financial, technical and other forms of assistance to strengthen its performance.	
Performance Reporting	All MDAs are required to prepare and submit quarterly performance reports to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by 30th of the first month of the preceding quarter e.g. the Third Quarter Report for the FY 2018/19 is required by 30th of April 2019. At MoFPED, the reports are reviewed by the Desk Officers, and the Budget Monitoring Unit and issues of concern are brought to the attention of the concerned Accounting Officers for action.In addition to the submitting reports to MoFPED, MDAs are required to submit six months (Semi-Annual Government Performance Report and 12 months reports (Annual Government Performance Report) to Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). A Cabinet retreat is held to review Government performance at half-year and after the end of the year and the retreat is coordinated by Office of the Prime Minister.	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 41

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Appendix 2: MoWT Diverted Amount and Affected Outputs

Invoice Number	Payment Date	Description	Distribution Amount	Project Affected	
D523-JUN-19	24/06/2019	LPO No. 5550 - Supply and delivery and installation of Digital archiving systems and remodelling of storage space under Phase 1	1,384,664	1096	
D552-JUN-19	23/06/2019	LPO. NO. 5433 - procurement of a D/ Cabin Pick-up vehicle for monitoring Gulu Roads as per Procurement ref. no. MOWT/SUPLS/18-19/00272.	17,859,664	1096	
D523-JUN-19	24/06/2019	LPO No. 5550 - Supply and delivery and installation of Digital archiving systems and remodelling of storage space under Phase 1	7,692,576	1096	
			26,936,904		
D210-JUN-19	18/06/2019	LPO No. 5506 - Consultancy services to compare transport costs and vehi- cle operations cost using murram and tarmac roads in Uganda	585,729,000	0951	
			585,729,000		
D033-DEC-18	05/12/2018	LPO NO.5143 - Replacement of a can- cilled LPO no.5151 for Consultancy Services for Construction, supervision of the Development of Kabaale Inter- national Airport, Hoima.	38,135,593	1097	
			38,135,593		
D218-SEP-18	13/09/2018	LPO No 4983 - Settlement of outstand- ing payment for construction of access road to Nyamuliro Wolfram mines in Rubanda district	152,542,373	0269	
			152,542,373		
D144 -SEP-18	02/10/2018	LPO No. 4987 - Consultancy services for feasibility studies for the project of rehabilitation of urban roads	44,392,163	0306	
D556-JAN-19	31/01/2019	LPO NO. 5113 - settlement for the sup- ply of construction materials for the rehabilitation of Nyakashura Gahire road in Ribirizi Town council Contract no. MpWT/SPL/17-18/00589 lots 1,2 and 3.Del. note 002,GRN no.52228 and Invoice no.006.	48,425,000	0306	
D125-APR-19	10/04/2019	LPO NO. 5327 - Supply of stone dust road lime material for construction of Internal roads and Parking areas at National agricultural and Trade Show grounds in JInja.	11,694,330	0306	
D539- FEB-19	14/02/2019	LPO NO. 5114 - settlement for the Upgrade to Bitumen Standard for Nyakashura Gahire road in Ribirizi Town council as per Delivery note no. 006, and Invoice no.011.	985,177	0306	




42

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Payment Date	Description	Distribution Amount	Project Affected	
D551-JAN-19	31/01/2019	LPO NO. 5086 - settlement for the Supply of Road Lime for construction of Nyakashura Gahire road in Ribirizi road as per GRN no. 52229, Delivery note no.282 and Invoice no.285.	10,028,800	0306	
			115,525,470		
D524-JUN-19	23/06/2019	LPO No. 5553 - Construction of Sezi- bwa swamp	56,615,322	1405	
D242-JUN-19	20/06/2019	LPO No. 5494 - C0nstruction of Lukaya Market - Certificate No. 4	64,856,665	1405	
D524-JUN-19	23/06/2019	LPO No. 5553 - Construction of Sezi- bwa swamp	10,190,758	1405	
			131,662,745		
Grand Total			1,050,532,085		




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 43

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Appendix 3: UNRA Diversion of funds.

Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1176W0519060056	3NOA 1SDA facilitation of staff to undertake supervision of works on Hoima Wanseko	25-Jun-19	625,000	Charles Kawande	1040 Kapchor- wa-Saum road	1176 Hoima- Wanseko road	
1176W0519060057	3NOA 1SDA facilitation of staff to undertake supervision of works on Hoima Wanseko	25-Jun-19	625,000	Grace Muwaga	1040 Kapchor- wa-Saum road	1176 Hoima- Wanseko road	
1176W0519060058	3NOA 1SDA facilitation of staff to undertake supervision of works on Hoima Wanseko	25-Jun-19	625,000	Alfred Ofayo Oroni	1040 Kapchor- wa-Saum road	1176 Hoima- Wanseko road	
1176W0519060059	3NOA 1SDA facilitation of staff to undertake supervision of works on Hoima Wanseko	25-Jun-19	625,000	Joseph Ka- wooya TCS005	1040 Kapchor- wa-Saum road	1176 Hoima- Wanseko road	
1277W0519060006	Mota Engil IPC 44a 01st install- ment payment Euro 5,477,391.14 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on KNBP	25-Jun-19	1,446,822,303	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1040 Kapchor- wa-Saum road	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1277W0519060006	Mota Engil IPC 44a 01st install- ment payment Euro 5,477,391.14 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on KNBP	25-Jun-19	2,023,265,000	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1281 Tirinyi- Pallisa -kumi/ Kamonkoli road	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1034W0519050002	SBI IPC 37F USD 1,303,011.74 + USD.35 @3852.41 Civil works on Mukono Katosi	06-May-19	4,500,000,000	SBI Internation- al Holdings	1322 Upgrading of Muyembe- nakapiripirit	1034Design of Mukono- Katosi road	
1277W0519060007	Mota Engil IPC 44a 02nd install- ment payment Euro 270,039.70 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on KNBP	25-Jun-19	90,000,000	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1322 Upgrading of Muyembe- nakapiripirit	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	




44

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1281W0519050001	Payment of The Arab Contrac- tors' IPC 6F Lot1 of USD 717,083.48 & IPC 5 Lot2 of USD 204,742.15 + charges of USD 35.00 all @ 3,900 Civil works for Tir- inyi Pallisa Kumi/ Pallisa Kamonkoli	28-May-19	1,229,092,053	The Arab Contractors (Osman Ahmed Osman & Co) (Forex)	1319 Kampala Flyover	1281 Tirinyi- Pallisa Kuma/ Kamokoli Road	
1056W0519060044	Part payment to CRSG Final pay- ment - Kamwenge F/Portal road bal. 738,906,751	25-Jun-19	140,853,997	China Railway Seventh Group Co. Limited	1319 Kampala Flyover	Kamwenge FortPortal road	
1056W0519060044	Part payment to CRSG Final pay- ment -Kamwenge F/Portal road bal. 738,906,751	25-Jun-19	25,353,719	China Railway Seventh Group Co. Limited	1319 Kampala Flyover	Kamwenge fortpotal road	
1056W0519050035	Mota Engil IPC No. 06L (01st install- ment) Civil works and rehabilitation of Ishaka-Katung- uru road (58Km)	28-May-19	39,294,830	Mota Engil Engenharia E Construcao Africa, SA	1319 Kampala Flyover	Ishaka-Ka- tunguru road	
1276W0519050002	CCCC IPC 14F USD 1,806,966.70 + USD 35 bank charges @ 3,900.00 Mubende Kakumiro	15-May-19	7,047,306,630	China Com- munications Construction Company Lim- ited (USD)	1319 Kampala Flyover	1276 Mubende- Kakumiro - Kagadi road	
1281W0519050003	The Arab Contrac- tors IPC 6L for LOT 1 and IPC 5L for lot 2 GOU portion -Pallisa Kumi Lot 1 /Pallisa Kamonkoli Road lot 2	31-May-19	1,271,321,318	The Arab Contractors (Osman Ahmed Osman & Co.)	1319 Kampala Flyover	1281 Tirinyi- Pallisa Kuma/ Kamokoli Road	
1277W0519060007	Mota Engil IPC 44a 02nd install- ment payment Euro 270,039.70 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on KNBP	25-Jun-19	82,800,000	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1319 Kampala Flyover	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1276W0519050003	CCCC IPC 14L Mubende Kaku- miro	15-May-19	6,220,079,686	China Com- munication Construction Company Ltd	1319 Kampala Flyover	1276 Mubende- Kakumiro - Kagadi road	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 45

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

The Arab Contrac-

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

tors IPC 6L for LOT 1 and IPC 5L for 1281W0519050003 lot 2 GOU portion 31-May-19 228,837,837

- Kumi Lot 1 /Pallisa Kamonkoli Road lot 2

Mota Engil IPC No. 06L (01st install- ment) Civil works 1056W0519050035 28-May-19 218,304,610 and rehabilitation of Ishaka-Katung- uru road (58Km)

1SDA facilitation of staff for inspection 0957W0519120001 of works on New 04-Dec-18 25,000 jinja nile bridge on 30 Nov 2018

1SDA facilitation of staff for inspection 0957W0519120002 of works on New 04-Dec-18 25,000 jinja nile bridge on 30 Nov 2018

1SDA facilitation of staff for inspection 0957W0519120003 of works on New 04-Dec-18 15,000 jinja nile bridge on 30 Nov 2018

The Arab 1281 Tirinyi- Contractors 1319 Kampala Pallisa Kuma/ (Osman Ahmed Flyover Kamokoli Osman & Co.) Road

Mota Engil Engenharia 1319 Kampala Ishaka-Ka- E Construcao Flyover tunguru road Africa , SA

0957 new Alex Kwesiga 1176 Hoima- Nile Bridge at 1000162050 wanseko road Jinja.

0957 new Kanyamunyu 1176 Hoima- Nile Bridge at Julius Edward wanseko road Jinja.

0957 new Butia Adrabo 1176 Hoima- Nile Bridge at William 872940 wanseko road Jinja.

SBI-IPC 34 AND 1034 of Mu- SBI Internation- 1176 Hoima- 1034W0519040001 35-Civil works on 23-Apr-19 4,546,351,587 kono-Katosi al Holdings AG wanseko road Mukono Katosi road

SBI-IPC 33(balance payt),34,35-USD 1034 of Mu- 2,401,677.81 + USD SBI Internation- 1176 Hoima- 1034W0519040002 25-Apr-19 9,708,587,795 kono-Katosi 35@4042.36-Civil al Holdings wanseko road road works on Mukono Katosi

SBI-IPC 36L-Civil 1034W0519040005 works on Mukono 02-May-19 1,645,055,666 Katosi

SBI-IPC 36F-USD 888,939.44 + USD 1034W0519040006 35@4042-Civil 02-May-19 3,593,234,686 works on Mukono Katosi

Payment of China Railway No.3 IPC

1034 of Mu- SBI Internation- 1176 Hoima- kono-Katosi al Holdings AG wanseko road road

1034 of Mu- SBI Internation- 1176 Hoima- kono-Katosi al Holdings wanseko road road

China Railway 23F $1,276,709.10 No.3 Engineer- 1035 Mpigi 1176 Hoima- 1035W0519040001 & 24F $667,921.16 24-Apr-19 7,861,037,060 ing Group Kabulasoke- wanseko road + charges @ $35 Co. (Uganda) Maddu Kanoni Sembabule Limited-Forex Villa Maria

46

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1035W0519040002	Payment of Energo's IPCF 22 $1,082,360.39 & IPC 23F 23 $3,030,338.01 +charges $35 all at 4,042.36	18-Apr-19	16,625,148,987	Energoprojekt Niskogradnja (USD)	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1035 Mpigi kabulasoke- Maddu	
1035W0519040003	Final payment of AECOM's Invoice No.45F $46,723.00 + charges $35 all at 4,042.36 Su- pervision of Mpigi Kanoni Sembabule Villa Maria	18-Apr-19	189,012,669	Aecom South Africa Holdings (Pty) Ltd	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1035 Mpigi kabulasoke- Maddu	
1035W0519040004	Payment of China Railway No.3's IPC 23L balance of UGX 3,370,085,898 & IPC 24L of UGX 2,228,232,203 Civil works Kanoni Sembabule Villa Maria	24-Apr-19	4,744,337,373	China Railway No.3 Engineer- ing Group Co. Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1035 Mpigi kabulasoke- Maddu	
1035W0519040004	Payment of China Railway No.3's IPC 23L balance of UGX 3,370,085,898 & IPC 24L of UGX 2,228,232,203 Civil works Kanoni Sembabule Villa Maria	24-Apr-19	853,980,728	China Railway No.3 Engineer- ing Group Co. Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1035 Mpigi kabulasoke- Maddu	
1035W0519040005	Payment of Energo's IPC 22L UGX 1,440,245,348 & IPC 23L UGX 3,902,921,909 Civil works Mpigi Kanoni Road	26-Apr-19	4,528,107,845	Energo Projekt	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1035 Mpigi kabulasoke- Maddu	
1035W0519040005	Payment of Energo's IPC 22L UGX 1,440,245,348 & IPC 23L UGX 3,902,921,909 Civil works Mpigi Kanoni Road	26-Apr-19	815,059,412	Energo Projekt	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1035 Mpigi kabulasoke- Maddu	
1035W0519040007	Payment of China Railway's IPC 25F of USD 1,009,007.80 + Charges USD 35 all at 4042.36 Civil works Kanoni Sembabule Villa Maria	30-Apr-19	4,078,914,253	China Railway No.3 Engineer- ing Group Co. (Uganda) Limited-Forex	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1035 Mpigi kabulasoke- Maddu	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 47

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

China Railway No.3 China Railway 1035 Mpigi IPC 25 L Kanoni No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- 1035W0519040008 02-May-19 2,742,677,255 kabulasoke- Sembabule Villa ing Group Co. wanseko road Maddu Maria Limited

China Railway No.3 China Railway 1035 Mpigi IPC 25 L Kanoni No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- 1035W0519040008 02-May-19 493,681,906 kabulasoke- Sembabule Villa ing Group Co. wanseko road Maddu Maria Limited

4 NOA 1 SDA 1056 Trans-

- for Akuze Richard 1176 Hoima- 1056D0719110148 21-Nov-18 1,030,000 port corridor site inspection of 762006 wanseko road project Kapchwora-Suam

4 NOA 1 SDA 1056 Trans-

- for Waidha Jude 1176 Hoima- 1056D0719110149 21-Nov-18 825,000 port corridor site inspection of Tadeo wanseko road project Kapchwora-Suam

4 NOA 1 SDA 1056 Trans-

- for 1176 Hoima- 1056D0719110150 21-Nov-18 415,000 Emune Ben port corridor site inspection of wanseko road project Kapchwora-Suam

CICO-IPC 29,30,31 1056W0519040061 - USD. 7,182,940 + 18-Apr-19 29,036,170,821 USD.35 @ 4042.36

Dott Services

Chongqing 1056 Trans- International 1176 Hoima- port corridor Construction wanseko road project Corporation.

Ltd- IPC 05F $ 1056 Trans- 2,348210.63 +$35 Dott Services 1176 Hoima- 1056W0519040152 02-May-19 9,491,608,836 port corridor Bank Charges Limited-(USD) wanseko road project

- Tirinyi

Road

Transfer of funds

to cater for the In-House 1056 Trans- operartional activi- 1176 Hoima- 1056W0519050005 06-May-19 500,000,000 Construction port corridor ties on the Kitala wanseko road Project Account project Gerenge inhouse

project

Mota Engil IPC No.

06L (Final install- Mota Engil 1056 Trans- ment) Civil works Engenharia 1176 Hoima- 1056W0519050036 28-May-19 395,393,614 port corridor and rehabilitation E Construcao wanseko road project of Ishaka-Katung- Africa , SA

uru road (58Km)

Mota Engil IPC No.

06L (Final install- Mota Engil 1056 Trans- ment) Civil works Engenharia 1176 Hoima- 1056W0519050036 28-May-19 2,196,631,191 port corridor and rehabilitation E Construcao wanseko road project of Ishaka-Katung- Africa , SA

uru road (58Km)

1056 Trans- MBW Fee Note 08 Mbw Consulting 1176 Hoima- 1056W0519060002 20-Jun-19 89,320,000 port corridor Nansana Busunju Limited wanseko road project

6% WHT on MBW 1056 Trans- Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- 1056W0519060003 Fee Note 08 25-Jun-19 4,785,000 port corridor enue Authority wanseko road Nansana Busunju project

48

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1056W0519060005	MBW Consult- ing Fee Note 19 Ishaka-Katunguru	20-Jun-19	95,304,000	MBW Consult- ing Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060006	6% WHT MBW Consulting Fee note 19	25-Jun-19	5,055,000	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060007	MBW Consult- ing Fee Note 20 Ishaka-Katunguru	20-Jun-19	106,728,000	MBW Consult- ing Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060008	6% WHT MBW Consulting Fee note 20	25-Jun-19	5,667,000	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060010	KOM Consult INV 25 USD. 14,693.36 + 35 @ 3824.74 Hima katunguru	20-Jun-19	56,332,148	Kom Consult Ltd -Foreign	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060011	LEA ASS INV 25 USD. 41,727.75 + 35 @ 3824.74 Hima Katunguru	20-Jun-19	159,731,660	Lea Associates South Asia Pvt. Ltd-Forex	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060012	3NOA and 1SDA- Site inspection Nakalama Tirinyi from 11-14/06/19	20-Jun-19	625,000	Ocet Tonny	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060013	SABA ENG PL INV 12 Fortportal Hima Road	20-Jun-19	27,988,294	Saba Engineer- ing Private Lim- ited Company	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060013	SABA ENG PL INV 12 Fortportal Hima Road	20-Jun-19	155,490,520	Saba Engineer- ing Private Lim- ited Company	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519060019	3 NOA and 1SDA- Site inspection along Nakalama Tirinyi road from 4-7/06/19	22-Jun-19	625,000	Ocet Tonny	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519080065	Field Facilitation Kyenjojo Fortportal Rd complisnce as- sessment 5NOA	22-Aug-18	1,020,000	Henry Seguya Kizito	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519080066	Field Facilitation Kyenjojo Fortportal Rd complisnce as- sessment 5NOA	22-Aug-18	1,020,000	Wycliffe Tumusiime	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519080067	Field Facilitation Kyenjojo Fortportal Rd complisnce as- sessment 5NOA	22-Aug-18	290,000	Moses Ssekabira	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519080075	Field facilitation to Kyenjojo Fortportal 2NOA	22-Aug-18	425,000	Rebeccah Nazimuli 762217	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	
1056W0519080076	Field facilitation to Kyenjojo Fortportal 2NOA	22-Aug-18	425,000	Grace Sana Martha	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1056 Trans- port corridor project	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 49

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

Field facilitation to 1056W0519080077 Kyenjojo Fortportal 22-Aug-18 125,000 2NOA

1056 Trans- Galiwango God- 1176 Hoima- port corridor frey 761929 wanseko road project

1 NOA and 1 SDA to 1056W1519080012 Ishaka Kagamba 08-Aug-18 115,000 James Senoga 24th July 2018

Facilitation to- wards site inspec- tion and progress

1056 Trans- 1176 Hoima- port corridor wanseko road project

and progress 117W0519080001 08-Aug-18 1,025,000 review meeting Buhimba Kakumiro road 06 - 11 Aug 2018

Facilitation to- wards site inspec- tion and progress and progress 117W0519080002 08-Aug-18 1,025,000 review meeting Buhimba Kakumiro road 06 - 11 Aug 2018

Facilitation to- wards site inspec- tion and progress and progress 117W0519080003 08-Aug-18 1,025,000 review meeting Buhimba Kakumiro road 06 - 11 Aug 2018

CCCC's IPC 26L GOU component 1180W0519040004 Works on Kampala 26-Apr-19 3,142,353,128 Entebbe Express- way

Nakonde 1176 Hoima- Buhimba Ka- Zaituni 761824 wanseko road kumiro road

Paddy 1176 Hoima- Buhimba Ka- Ahimbisibwe wanseko road kumiro road

Yusuf 1176 Hoima- Buhimba Ka- Semuyaga wanseko road kumiro road

China Com- 1180 Kampa- munication 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Construction wanseko road Express Company Ltd highway

CCCC's IPC 26F China Com- GOU component munications USD 1,003,333.64 + 1180W0519040005 26-Apr-19 4,055,616,043 Construction $ 35 @ 4,042 Works Company Lim- on Kampala En- ited (USD) tebbe Expressway

1180 Kampa- 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe wanseko road Express highway

Beijing Expressway Invoice 19 Supervi- 1180W0519040006 sion of Kampala 02-May-19 75,610,691 Entebbe Express- way

Beijing Expressway Invoice 19 Supervi- 1180W0519040006 sion of Kampala 02-May-19 420,059,390 Entebbe Express- way

Beijing Expressway Invoice 20 Supervi- 1180W0519040007 sion of Kampala 02-May-19 66,431,392 Entebbe Express- way

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Ltd highway

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Ltd highway

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Ltd highway

50

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

Beijing Expressway Invoice 20 Supervi- 1180W0519040007 sion of Kampala 02-May-19 369,063,288 Entebbe Express- way

China Communica- tion's Interest IPC (IPCs 17 - 22) Ugx component ONLY 1180W0519040009 Works on Kampala 02-May-19 200,547,648 Entebbe Express- way (USD used to recover price adjustment deficit)

Beijing Expressway Invoice 21 local supervision of 1180W0519050001 06-May-19 355,873,048 works on Kampala

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Ltd highway

China Com- 1180 Kampa- munication 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Construction wanseko road Express Company Ltd highway

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Entebbe Express- Ltd highway way

Beijing Expressway Invoice 21 local supervision of 1180W0519050001 06-May-19 64,057,149 works on Kampala

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Entebbe Express- Ltd highway way

Beijing Express- way's Inv. 22 & 23 (444,679,069 & 448,654,851) 1180W0519060001 respectively for 20-Jun-19 757,062,644 Consultancy Supervision of Kampala Entebbe Expressway

Beijing Express- way's Inv. 22 & 23 (444,679,069 & 448,654,851) 1180W0519060001 respectively for 20-Jun-19 136,271,276 Consultancy Supervision of Kampala Entebbe Expressway

IPC 10(balance

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Ltd highway

Beijing 1180 Kampa- Expressway 1176 Hoima- la-Entebbe Supervision Co wanseko road Express Ltd highway

payt),11,12,13-USD CHINA RAILWAY 1274Lusita- 4,311,555.00+USD 1274W0519040012 18-Apr-19 10,791,285,100 35@4042.36-Civil works on Musita Lumino

18TH BUREAU 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- GROUP CO LTD wanseko road Busia/Majanji (FOREX) road

China Railway 18-IPC 10L(balance China Railway 1274W0519040017 payt),11L,12L and 02-May-19 1,746,017,949 18th Bureau 13L-Civil works on Group Co Ltd Musita Lumino

China Railway 18-IPC 10L(balance China Railway 1274W0519040017 payt),11L,12L and 02-May-19 9,700,099,715 18th Bureau 13L-Civil works on Group Co Ltd Musita Lumino

1274Lusita- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274Lusita- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 51 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

China Railway 18-IPC 14F - USD 1274W0519040021 713,542 + USD 35 @ 02-May-19 2,884,278,234 4042 - Cicil works on Musita Lumino

China Railway 1274 Lusita- 18Th Bureau 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- Group Co Ltd wanseko road Busia/Majanji (Forex) road

China Railway 18- China Railway 1274W0519040022 IPC 14L-Civil works 03-May-19 1,875,783,094 18Th Bureau on Musita Lumino

China Railway 18-IPC 14L - Civil 1274W0519040022 works on Musita Lumino

CEC inv 48, 49,50

Group Co Ltd

China Railway 03-May-19 337,640,957 18Th Bureau Group Co Ltd

USD 115,904.35 Consulting 1274W0519060008 @ 3,824.74 + $ 20-Jun-19 443,437,870 Engineering 35 bank charges Center (USD) Musita Lumino

1274 Lusita- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274 Lusita- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274 Lusita- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

6% WHT for Con- sulting Engineers 1274W0519060009 Center inv 48,49 25-Jun-19 26,598,240 and 50 Musita Lumino

MBW inv 48,49,50 $ 65,937.86 @ 1274W0519060010 20-Jun-19 252,329,037 3,824.74 Musita Lumino

6% WHT - MBW 1274W0519060011 inv 48,49,50 Musita 25-Jun-19 15,214,325 Lumino

CEC INV 42a and

1274 Lusita- Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- enue Authority wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274 Lusita- MBW Consult- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- ing Ltd - USD wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274 Lusita- Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- enue Authority wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

51a Usd 31,581.68 Consulting @ 3,824.74 Musita 1274W0519060012 20-Jun-19 228,286,032 Engineering Lumino. original of Center (USD) inv 42 attached to 1274W0619110004

1274 Lusita- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274 Lusita- WHT CEC inv 42 1274W0519060013 25-Jun-19 13,689,130 Musita Lumino

MBW inv 51 a+b USD 35,906.92 @ 1274W0519060014 20-Jun-19 137,468,499 3,824.74 Musita Lumino

WHT MBW inv 1274W0519060015 51A and B Busita 25-Jun-19 8,267,616 Lumino

Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- enue Authority wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274 Lusita- MBW Consult- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- ing Ltd- USD wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

1274 Lusita- Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- enue Authority wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

CEC inv 52a Consulting $26,060.87+$35 1274W0519060016 22-Jun-19 99,809,918 Engineering @3,824.74 Musita Center (USD) Lumino

1274 Lusita- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

WHT CEC inv 52 a $ 1274W0519060017 1,563.65 @ 3,824.74 25-Jun-19 5,980,563 Musita Lumino

1274 Lusita- Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- Lumino road- enue Authority wanseko road Busia/Majanji road

52

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1274W0519060020	Payment for inv 52a $ 30,496.70+$ 35 bank charges @ 3,824.74 Musita Lumino	22-Jun-19	116,775,814	MBW Consult- ing Ltd- USD	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1274 Lusita- Lumino road- Busia/Majanji road	
1274W0519060021	WHT MBW inv 52a Musita Lumino	25-Jun-19	6,998,516	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1274 Lusita- Lumino road- Busia/Majanji road	
1274W0519060022	Payment for In- voice No.52b USD. 1,553.04 + $35 @ 3,824.74 Musita- Lumino road	22-Jun-19	6,073,839	MBW Consult- ing Ltd- USD	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1274Lusita- Lumino road- Busia/Majanji road	
1274W0519060023	WHT for invoice no 52b Musita-Lumino road	25-Jun-19	379,147	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1274 Lusita- Lumino road- Busia/Majanji road	
1275L0519040013	Firstland survey- ors-Inv 046-Con- sultancy services for involuntary resettlement-Olwi- yo Gulu	02-May-19	148,510,829	Firstland Sur- veyors	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1275 Olwiyo- Gulu-Acholi- bur-Musingo	
1275L0519040014	6%WHT on First- land surveyors Inv 046-Consultany services for invol- untary resettle- ment-Olwiyo Gulu	02-May-19	7,955,937	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1275 Olwiyo- Gulu-Acholi- bur-Musingo	
1275L0519040015	Katuramu - Invoice 06 - Con- sultancy services for expropriation of land -Acholibur Musingo	02-May-19	111,717,648	Katuramu and Company	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1275 Olwiyo- Gulu-Acholi- bur-Musingo	
1275L0519040016	6%WHT on Invoice 06 - Katuramu and Company - Con- sultancy services for expropriation of land - Acholibur Musingo	02-May-19	5,984,874	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1275 Olwiyo- Gulu-Acholi- bur-Musingo	
1275W0519040009	Zhongmei-IPC 19F- USD 508,070.43 + USD 35 @ 4042.36 - Civil works on Olwiyo Gulu	18-Apr-19	2,053,945,066	Zhongmei Engi- neering Group Ltd	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1275 Olwiyo- Gulu-Acholi- bur-Musingo	
1275W0519040010	Zhongmei- IPC 18(balance payt)&19-Civil works on Olwiyo Gulu	23-Apr-19	2,135,646,138	Zhongmei Engi- neering Group Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1275 Olwiyo- Gulu-Acholi- bur-Musingo	
1275W0519040012	CICO-IPC 18 (bal- ance payment), 29,30,31 - Civil works on Acholibur Musingo	30-Apr-19	1,005,642,624	Chongqing International Construction Corporation	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1275 Olwiyo- Gulu-Acholi- bur-Musingo	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 53

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

CICO-IPC 18 (bal- ance payment), 1275W0519040012 29,30,31 - Civil 30-Apr-19 5,586,903,465 works on Acholibur

Musingo

Chongqing 1275 Olwiyo- International 1176 Hoima- Gulu-Acholi- Construction wanseko road bur-Musingo Corporation

Comptran-Invoice Comptran Engi- 1275 Olwiyo- 52F - USD 40,925 + neering & Plan- 1176 Hoima- 1275W0519040013 02-May-19 165,560,320 Gulu-Acholi- USD 35 - Supervi- ning Associates wanseko road bur-Musingo sion of Olwiyo Gulu Limited (Forex)

Zhongmei IPC 19F USD 508,070.43

and USD 35 @ Zhongmei Engi- 1275 Olwiyo- 1176 Hoima- 1275W0519050002 3,852.41 - Civil 10-May-19 1,957,430,440 neering Group Gulu-Acholi- wanseko road works on Olwiyo Ltd bur-Musingo

Gulu Return of bounced payment

Zhongmei IPC 19F USD 508,070.43

and USD 35 @ Zhongmei Engi- 1275 Olwiyo- 1176 Hoima- 1275W0519050002 3,852.41 - Civil 08-May-19 1,957,430,440 neering Group Gulu-Acholi- wanseko road works on Olwiyo Ltd bur-Musingo

Gulu Return of bounced payment

CICO IPC 32F USD 4,274,500 and $35 bank charges @ 1275W0519050004 3,852.41 Acholibur 08-May-19 4,548,420,157 Musingo bal of USD 834,998 not paid

CICO IPC 32F USD 4,274,500 and $35 bank charges @ 1275W0519050004 3,852.41 Acholibur 10-May-19 4,548,420,157 Musingo bal of USD 834,998 not paid

CICO IPC 32L Civil 1275W0519050017 works on Acholibur 10-May-19 6,186,280,455 Musingo

CICO IPC 32L Civil 1275W0519050017 works on Acholibur 10-May-19 1,113,530,482 Musingo

CCCC-IPC 13L (balance payment)- 1276W0519040003 Civil works on 17-Apr-19 5,730,251,567 Mubende Kaku-

miro

Chongqing 1275 Olwiyo- International 1176 Hoima- Gulu-Acholi- Construction wanseko road bur-Musingo Corporation

Chongqing 1275 Olwiyo- International 1176 Hoima- Gulu-Acholi- Construction wanseko road bur-Musingo Corporation

Chongqing 1275 Olwiyo- International 1176 Hoima- Gulu-Acholi- Construction wanseko road bur-Musingo Corporation

Chongqing 1275 Olwiyo- International 1176 Hoima- Gulu-Acholi- Construction wanseko road bur-Musingo Corporation

China Com- 1276 munication 1176 Hoima- Mubende- Construction wanseko road Kakumiro -

Company Ltd Kagadi road

CCCC-IPC 13F-USD China Com-

2,495,901.89+USD munications

1276W0519040004 35@4042.36-Civil 18-Apr-19 10,089,475,447 Construction

works on Mubende Company Lim-

Kakumiro ited (USD)

1276 1176 Hoima- Mubende- wanseko road Kakumiro - Kagadi road

54

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1277L0519020005	10SDA faclitation of staff to undertake land acquisition activities on KNBP from 19 Feb - 14 Mar 2019	25-Feb-19	200,000	Akibu Wadem- bere	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1277W0519040001	Being payment of COWI's final installment invoice 09 Euro 375,056.77 @ 4,548.11 + $ 35 @ 4,042.36 Kampala Northern Bypass Supervision	18-Apr-19	1,705,940,929	COWI.	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1277W0519060007	Mota Engil IPC 44a 02nd install- ment payment Euro 270,039.70 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on KNBP	25-Jun-19	54,609,564	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1277W0519060008	Mota Engil IPC 44a 3rd installment Euro 22,565.07 @ 4,262.02 + $35 @ 3,824.74 Works on Kampala Northern Bypass bal Euro 1,865,749.49	25-Jun-19	608,192	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1277W0519060008	Mota Engil IPC 44a 3rd installment Euro 22,565.07 @ 4,262.02 + $35 @ 3,824.74 Works on Kampala Northern Bypass bal Euro 1,865,749.49	25-Jun-19	2,579,080	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1278W0719040002	Juliet Asiimwe Sy- andira-Inv.000019- Provision of office premises for Land Acquisition at Kirinya-Bukasa for Kampala-Jinja Ex- pressway Project	15-May-19	1,372,881	Juliet Asiimwe Syandira	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1278 Kam- pala-Jinja Express way	
1278W0719040002	Juliet Asiimwe Sy- andira-Inv.000019- Provision of office premises for Land Acquisition at Kirinya-Bukasa for Kampala-Jinja Ex- pressway Project	15-May-19	7,627,119	Juliet Asiimwe Syandira	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1278 Kam- pala-Jinja Express way	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 55

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Arab Contrac- tors IPC 04F Lot

2 & IPC 05 Lot

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1GOU Portion USD 547,148.96

@ 4042.36 Plus 1281W0519040007 USD35 Bank

charges - Pal- lisa Kamonkoli & Tirinyi-Kumi Rd projects respec-

tively

The Arab Contractors 18-Apr-19 2,211,914,556 (Osman Ahmed Osman & Co)

(Forex)

1281 Tirinyi- 1176 Hoima- Pallisa Kuma/ wanseko road Kamokoli Road

The Arab Contrac- tors IPC 5L GOU 1281W0519040008 portion -Tirinyi 24-Apr-19 479,124,367 Pallisa Kumi Road

lot 1

The Arab 1281 Tirinyi-

Contractors 1176 Hoima- Pallisa Kuma/ (Osman Ahmed wanseko road Kamokoli

Osman & Co.) Road

Shengli Shengli -Inter- 1310 Alber- Engineering est On Delayed tine Region Construction 1176 Hoima- 1310W0519040041 Payments For Ipcs 02-May-19 133,854,936 Sustainable (Group) Co. wanseko road 01-08- Kyenjojo Development Ltd Of Shengli Kabwoya Road Project Oilfield

10% NSSF contri-

bution for Benson 1310 Alber- Asiimwe, Mabel National Social tine Region Sebikari, Bernar Security Fund- 1176 Hoima- 1310W0519060007 20-Jun-19 5,418,800 Sustainable Tumwebaze Ans Fund Contribu- wanseko road Development Bukenya Swaibu tions Project for the month of

May 2019

1310 Alber-

tine Region 14 NOA June'19 1176 Hoima- 1310W0519060009 25-Jun-19 2,800,000 Dan Iga Sustainable field facilitation wanseko road Development

Project

1310 Alber-

tine Region 14 NOA May'19 field 1176 Hoima- 1310W0519060010 25-Jun-19 2,220,000 Dan Iga Sustainable facilitation wanseko road Development

Project

1310 Alber- 12 NOA and 1SDA Brian Bainomu- tine Region Monthly site in- 1176 Hoima- 1310W0519060011 20-Jun-19 680,000 gisha Unra/ Sustainable spection and E and wanseko road Get/024 Development S monitoring Project

04 NOA and 1SDA 1310W0519060012 Filed visit and site 20-Jun-19 825,000

inspection

1310 Alber-

tine Region Otim Alex P 1176 Hoima- Sustainable Okene wanseko road Development

Project

1310 Alber- 04 NOA and 1SDA 1310W0519060013 Filed visit and site 20-Jun-19 825,000 Betty Namatovu

inspection

tine Region 1176 Hoima- Sustainable wanseko road Development

Project

56

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1310W0519060014	05 NOA and 1SDA Followup site visit and Investigations -Kyenjojo Kabwoya	22-Jun-19	1,025,000	Wakoli Erina W/595	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1310 Alber- tine Region Sustainable Development Project	
1310W0519060015	05 NOA and 1SDA Followup site visit and Investigations -Kyenjojo Kabwoya	20-Jun-19	1,025,000	Mugume Gordon	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1310 Alber- tine Region Sustainable Development Project	
1310W0519060016	05 NOA and 1SDA Followup site visit and Investigations -Kyenjojo Kabwoya	20-Jun-19	1,025,000	Tukei Ismail	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1310 Alber- tine Region Sustainable Development Project	
1310W0519060017	05 NOA and 1SDA Followup site visit and Investigations -Kyenjojo Kabwoya	20-Jun-19	515,000	John Bosco Opoka	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1310 Alber- tine Region Sustainable Development Project	
1310W0519060018	Top up for field fa- cilitation - Environ- mental Safguards engagements along Kyen- jojo Kabwoya- Ref: 1310W0519050009	22-Jun-19	210,000	Tukei Ismail	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1310 Alber- tine Region Sustainable Development Project	
1319L0519060001	Compansation for Plot 13-29 Nsabya Road (UNRA vs Uganda Railway Corporation & others	25-Jun-19	7,578,672,000	Registrar High Court	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1319 kampala flyover	
1319L0519060002	Compansation for LRV 4219 Folio 24 plot16A-22A and LRV 4374 Folio 24,Plot 26A-28A Kampala Flyover	25-Jun-19	3,442,336,000	Registrar High Court	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1319 kampala flyover	
1320W0519040021	CICO - Balance payment on Advance for Ora1, Ora2, Awa and Olemika brdges	02-May-19	252,827,158	Chongqing International Construction Corporation	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1320 Con- struction of 66 selected bridges	
1320W0519040021	CICO - Balance payment on Advance for Ora1, Ora2, Awa and Olemika brdges	02-May-19	1,404,595,321	Chongqing International Construction Corporation	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1320 Con- struction of 66 selected bridges	
1320W0519040022	CICO - Final Payment - USD 126,259.00 + USD 35 @ - Civil works on Aswa bridge	02-May-19	510,480,348	Chongqing International Construction Corporation.	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1320 Con- struction of 66 selected bridges	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 57

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

CICO - Local portion of Final

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

Chongqing 1320 Con- Payment Certifi- 1320W0519040023 08-May-19 16,919,117 cate - Emergency

International 1176 Hoima- struction of Construction wanseko road 66 selected reconstruction of Corporation bridges Aswa bridge

CICO - Local portion of Final Payment Certifi- 1320W0519040023 08-May-19 93,995,094 cate - Emergency

Chongqing 1320 Con- International 1176 Hoima- struction of Construction wanseko road 66 selected reconstruction of Corporation bridges Aswa bridge

CCCCC IPC 21 L So- 1403W0519040011 roti Akisim Moroto 24-Apr-19 2,930,371,712 Road

CCCC IPC 20 L So- 1403W0519040013 roti Akisim Moroto 24-Apr-19 3,089,133,452 Rd

CCC IPC 19L Bal- ance previously un 1403W0519040016 24-Apr-19 501,345,023 paid - Soroti Aki- sim Moroto Road

China Com- 1403 Soroti- munication 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Construction wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Company Ltd tonyala.

China Com- 1403 Soroti- munication 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Construction wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Company Ltd tonyala.

China Com- 1403 Soroti- munication 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Construction wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Company Ltd tonyala.

CR/WAY China Railway N.3 IPCs 19 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- USD.1,994,557.79 1176 Hoima- katakwi- 1403W0519040017 24-Apr-19 16,364,484,598 ing Group + IPC20 wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Co. (Uganda) USD.2,103,657.39 + tonyala. Limited-Forex 35 @ 4042.36

CCCC IPC 19 USD.992,716.15+ China Com- IPC 20 1403 Soroti- munications USD.1,189,987.45 1176 Hoima- katakwi- 1403W0519040018 24-Apr-19 13,399,660,324 Construction + IPC 21 wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Company Lim- USD.1,132,072.63 + tonyala. ited (Foreign) 35 @ 4042.36 Soroti Akisim Moroto

CR/Way N.3 IPC 19 1403W0519040019 L Sorotti Akisim 24-Apr-19 3,485,267,503 Moroto Rd

CR/Way N.3 IPC 19 1403W0519040019 L Sorotti Akisim 24-Apr-19 627,348,151 Moroto Rd

CR/Way N.3 IOPC 1403W0519040020 20L Soroti Akisim 24-Apr-19 3,746,954,682 Moroto Rd

CR/Way N.3 IOPC 1403W0519040020 20L Soroti Akisim 24-Apr-19 674,451,843 Moroto Rd

MBW Consulting Invoices 4-12 So- 1403W0519040021 24-Apr-19 1,413,571,150 roti Akisim Moroto Road

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

1403 Soroti- MBW Consult- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Limited wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

58

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1403W0519040022	WHT MBW Con- sulting Invoices 4-12 Soroti Akisim Moroto RD	02-May-19	84,401,341	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040023	Gibb Africa In- voices 4-12 Soroti Akisim Moroto Rd	25-Apr-19	712,499,717	Gibb Africa Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040023	Gibb Africa In- voices 4-12 Soroti Akisim Moroto Rd	25-Apr-19	128,249,949	Gibb Africa Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040024	WHT Gibb Africa Invoices 4-12 Soroti Akisim Moroto Rd	25-Apr-19	53,664,872	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040025	COWI A/S Invoices 9,10 And 11 Soroti Akisim Moroto	25-Apr-19	534,241,276	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040025	COWI A/S Invoices 9,10 And 11 Soroti Akisim Moroto	25-Apr-19	96,163,430	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040026	Wht Cowi Invvoices 9,10 And 11 Soroti Akisim Moroto	25-Apr-19	69,376,159	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040028	COWI INV 8 Soroti Akisim Moroto	02-May-19	22,701,305	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040028	COWI INV 8 Soroti Akisim Moroto	02-May-19	126,118,359	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040029	WHT COWI INV 8 Soroti Akisim Moroto	02-May-19	19,840,642	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040030	COWI INV 12 Soroti Akisim Moroto	02-May-19	122,383,959	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040030	COWI INV 12 Soroti Akisim Moroto	02-May-19	22,029,113	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040031	WHT COWI INV 12 Soroti Akisim Moroto	02-May-19	19,604,574	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519040032	CRN3. IPC 21F USD. 1,520,831.17 + 35 @ 4042 Soroti Akisim Moroto Rd	02-May-19	6,147,341,059	China Railway No.3 Engineer- ing Group Co. (Uganda) Limited-Forex	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 59

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

China Railway 1403 Soroti- CRN.3 IPC21 L So- 1403W0519040033 02-May-19 2,709,454,106 roti Akisim Moroto

CRN.3 IPC21 L So- 1403W0519040033 02-May-19 487,701,740 roti Akisim Moroto

CCCC IPC 22 L SSo- 1403W0519040035 02-May-19 3,013,097,962 roti Akisim Moroto

No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

China Com- 1403 Soroti- munication 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Construction wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Company Ltd tonyala.

China Com- CCCC IPC 22F USD. 1403 Soroti- munications 1,195,484.16 + 35 @ 1176 Hoima- katakwi- 1403W0519040037 02-May-19 4,832,288,445 Construction 4,042 Soroti Akisim wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Company Lim- Moroto Rd tonyala. ited (Usd)

MBW Invoice 13 Soroti Akisim 1403W0519040038 02-May-19 164,983,300 Mororo Rd -GIBB

1403 Soroti- MBW Consult- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Limited wanseko road Moroto-Loki- JV MBW tonyala.

WHT MBW Invoice 13 Soroti Akisim 1403W0519040039 02-May-19 10,530,849 Moroto Rd GIBB JV MBW

CRN.3 IPC 22 L So- 1403W0519050001 06-May-19 627,594,378 roti Akisim Moroto

CRN.3 IPC 22 L So- 1403W0519050001 06-May-19 3,486,635,431 roti Akisim Moroto

1403 Soroti- Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- enue Authority wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

CRN.3 IPC22 F China Railway USD. 1,957,506.04 No.3 Engineer- 1403W0519050002 + 35 @ 3852.41 So- 06-May-19 7,541,250,678 ing Group roti Akisim Moroto Co. (Uganda) Road Limited-Forex

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

CRN.3 IPC23 L So- 1403W0519050003 roti Akisim Moroto 06-May-19 314,079,350 Rd

CRN.3 IPC23 L So- 1403W0519050003 roti Akisim Moroto 06-May-19 1,744,885,273 Rd

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

China Railway 1403 Soroti- No.3 Engineer- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- ing Group Co. wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Limited tonyala.

CRN.3 IPC 23 F USD. 977,729.94 + 1403W0519050004 35 @ 3,852.41 So- roti Akisim Moroto

COWI A/S Invoices 13-135,714,603 and 1403W0519050005 14-142,022,704 So- roti Akisim Moroto

China Railway No.3 Engineer- 06-May-19 3,766,751,433 ing Group Co. (Uganda) Limited-Forex

08-May-19 235,370,599 COWI A/S

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

60

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1403W0519050005	COWI A/S Invoices 13-135,714,603 and 14-142,022,704 So- roti Akisim Moroto	08-May-19	42,366,708	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050007	WHT COWI A/S Invoices 13- 19,138,585 and In- voice 14-19,476,520 Sorti Akisim Moroto Road	13-May-19	38,615,105	UGANDA REV- ENUE AUTHOR- ITY	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050008	CCCC IPC 23F USD.1140422.65 + 35 @ 3,852.41 So- roti Akisim Mororo	10-May-19	4,393,510,455	China Com- munications Construction Company Lim- ited (USD)	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050008	CCCC IPC 23F USD.1140422.65 + 35 @ 3,852.41 So- roti Akisim Mororo	08-May-19	4,393,510,455	China Com- munications Construction Company Lim- ited (USD)	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050009	CCCC IPC23L Soroti Akism Moroto	10-May-19	2,874,687,372	China Com- munication Construction Company Ltd	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050010	COWI A/S Inv 15 Soroti Akisim Moroto	08-May-19	297,290,419	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050010	COWI A/S Inv 15 Soroti Akisim Moroto	08-May-19	53,512,275	COWI A/S	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050011	6% WHT on COWI A/S Inv 15 Soroti Akisim Moroto	13-May-19	18,793,002	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050012	GIBB Africa Inv 13 Soroti Akisim Moroto	08-May-19	16,303,620	GIBB Africa Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050012	GIBB Africa Inv 13 Soroti Akisim Moroto	08-May-19	90,575,667	GIBB Africa Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519050013	6% WHT on GIBB Africa Inv 13 Soroti Akisim Moroto	13-May-19	6,822,082	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	
1403W0519060001	MBW Soroti Akisim Moroto Invoices 14 ugx:181,698,875 Invoice 15 ugx: 167,234,751 invoice 16 Ugx: 167,234,751 Supervision	20-Jun-19	516,168,377	MBW Consult- ing Limited	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1403 Soroti- katakwi- Moroto-Loki- tonyala.	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 61

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

WHT MBW So- roti Akisim Moroto Invvoice 14ugx:

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1403 Soroti- 11,597,801Invoice 1403W0519060002 25-Jun-19 32,946,919 15Ugx: 10,674,559 invoice 16 Ugx: 10,674,559 Super- vision

COWI A/S Invoices

Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- enue Authority wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

16ugx:365,355,97 1403 Soroti- and 1403W0519060003 20-Jun-19 681,200,321 COWI A/S 17ugx:438,460,400 Soroti Akisim Mo- roto Rd

COWI A/S Invoices

1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

16ugx:365,355,97 1403 Soroti- and 1403W0519060003 20-Jun-19 122,616,058 COWI A/S 17ugx:438,460,400 Soroti Akisim Mo- roto Rd

COWI WHT invoices 16 UGX.19,572,642

1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- and invoice 17 1403W0519060004 25-Jun-19 43,061,592 UGX.23,488,950

Uganda Rev- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- enue Authority wanseko road Moroto-Loki- Soroti Akisim tonyala. Morort

Site Inspection and 1403W0519060022 22-Jun-19 820,000 Coverage

Site Inspection and 1403W0519060023 22-Jun-19 650,000 Supervision

Site Inspection and 1403W0519060024 22-Jun-19 425,000 Supervision

Site Inspection and 1403W0519060025 22-Jun-19 425,000 Supervision

Site Inspection and 1403W0519060026 22-Jun-19 215,000 Supervision

1403 Soroti- Kusasira 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Elizabeth L Sule wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Muhoozi 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Samuel 80629 wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Godfrey 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Bihemaiso wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Fortunate 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Kahigwa Hosea wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Maxima 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Mushabe wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Site Inspection and 1403W0519060027 22-Jun-19 215,000 Tayebwa Nixon Supervision

1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Site Inspection and 1403W0519060028 22-Jun-19 680,000 Supervision

Godfrey 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Bihemaiso wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

Manyindo Site Inspection and 1403W0519060029 22-Jun-19 270,000 Christopher Supervision 761326

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

62

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1403 Soroti- Site Inspection and 1403W0519060030 22-Jun-19 825,000 Juliet Ninsiima Supervision

1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Site Inspection and 1403W0519060031 22-Jun-19 825,000 Supervision

Site Inspection and 1403W0519060032 22-Jun-19 825,000 Supervision

Evelyn Mbabazi 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Rutty wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Fortunate 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Kahigwa Hosea wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Site Inspection and 1403W0519060033 22-Jun-19 245,000 James Senoga Supervision

Facilitation for

1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- project supervision 1403W0519060040 25-Jun-19 425,000 from 6th to 8th

Godfrey 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Bihemaiso wanseko road Moroto-Loki- June 2019 tonyala.

Allowance to staff for project supervision and 1403W0519060049 25-Jun-19 400,000 site inspection from 1st to 3rd April 2019

1403 Soroti- Godfrey 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Bihemaiso wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

Allowance to staff for project su- Manyindo 1403W0519060050 pervision and site 25-Jun-19 500,000 Christopher inspection from 1st 761326 to 3rd April 2019

Allowance to staff for project supervision and 1403W0519060051 25-Jun-19 400,000 Kisakye Ivan site inspection from 1st to 3rd April 2019

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

Allowance to staff for project su- 1403W0519060052 pervision and site 25-Jun-19 400,000 inspection from 1st to 3rd April 2019

Allowance to staff for project

1403 Soroti- Fortunate 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Kahigwa Hosea wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- supervision and 1403W0519060053 25-Jun-19 200,000 James Senoga site inspection from 1st to 3rd April 2019

Allowances to staff

1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- for project supervi- 1403W0519060054 25-Jun-19 625,000 sion from 5th to 8th March 2019

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060055 25-Jun-19 425,000 from 4th to 6th

Moses Kaggwa 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Luwemba wanseko road Moroto-Loki- tonyala.

1403 Soroti- Steven 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Musumba wanseko road Moroto-Loki- March 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060056 25-Jun-19 425,000 from 4th to 6th

1403 Soroti- Alice Lilian 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Mutesi wanseko road Moroto-Loki- March 2019 tonyala.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 63 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Facilitation for

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1403 Soroti- project supervision 1403W0519060057 25-Jun-19 125,000 Wilber Besigye from 4th to 6th

1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- March 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060058 25-Jun-19 425,000 from 7th to 9th

1403 Soroti- Steven 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Musumba wanseko road Moroto-Loki- March 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060059 25-Jun-19 425,000 from 7th to 9th

1403 Soroti- Alice Lilian 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Mutesi wanseko road Moroto-Loki- March 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060060 25-Jun-19 125,000 Wilber Besigye from 7th to 9th

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- March 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060061 25-Jun-19 720,000 Judith Acao from 3rd to 12th

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- April 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060062 25-Jun-19 245,000 from 3rd to 12th

1403 Soroti- Muhawe Julian 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Nzaba wanseko road Moroto-Loki- April 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060063 25-Jun-19 2,025,000 from 3rd to 12th

1403 Soroti- Tahaba Graham 1176 Hoima- katakwi- Jason wanseko road Moroto-Loki- April 2019 tonyala.

Facilitation for project supervision 1403W0519060064 from 3rd to 12th

25-Jun-19 1,015,000 James Gimadu

1403 Soroti- 1176 Hoima- katakwi- wanseko road Moroto-Loki- April 2019 tonyala.

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for 1446L0519020001 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 532,000 tion for Wanseko Bugungu Supp.1

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for 1446L0519020002 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 342,000 tion for Wanseko Bugungu Supp.1

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for 1446L0519020003 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 452,000 tion for Wanseko Bugungu Supp.1

1446 Masindi Magembe Kato 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Tonny 59985 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Namakula Mary 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Frances wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Winnie 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kemigisha wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for 1446L0519020004 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 231,000 Keera Moses tion for Wanseko Bugungu Supp.1

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for Louis 1446L0519020005 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 820,000 Byaruhanga tion for Wanseko Roy Bugungu Supp.1

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

64

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for 1446L0519020006 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 820,000 tion for Wanseko Bugungu Supp.1

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for 1446L0519020007 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 820,000 tion for Wanseko Bugungu Supp.1

04NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for 1446L0519020008 physical inspec- 12-Feb-19 415,000 tion for Wanseko Bugungu Supp.1

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation of boundary opening and subdivision 1446L0519020019 06-Mar-19 2,825,000 of registered land along Kisanja Park Junction from 4th to 18th March 2019

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation of boundary opening

1446 Masindi Kalinaki Abdul 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Hakim wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Kazaara James 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Azairwe wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Tom Jwarira- 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via kanwa Mugabe wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Joselyne 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kweera wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi and subdivision 1446L0519020020 of registered land along Kisanja Park Junction from 4th to 18th March 2019

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation of boundary opening and subdivision 1446L0519020021 of registered land along Kisanja Park Junction from 4th to 18th March 2019

Facilitation for support staff on boundary open- ing and subdivi- 1446L0519020022 sion of registered land Kisanja Park Junction 4th-18th Mar.2019

Local leader's

06-Mar-19 2,825,000 Richard Mugabi

06-Mar-19 1,415,000 Geoffery Oyoo

Accountant 15-Mar-19 2,826,628 General E-Cash

- MOFPED

1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

facilitation for 1446 Masindi Accountant stakeholder en- 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via 1446L0519020023 15-Mar-19 1,766,643 General E-Cash gagement along wanseko road Murchison

- MOFPED Hohwa-Nyairongo Falls Park Kyarushesha

08NOA 01SDA Facilitation for senstization prior 1451 Kabale- to verification and Vivian Luswata 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030001 06-Mar-19 1,625,000 Kiziranfumbi disclosure along Komugisha wanseko road Road Kabaale Kiziran- fumbi from 25th Feb. to 5th Mar.19

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 65 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

08NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

senstization prior 1451 Kabale- to verification and Aggrey 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030002 06-Mar-19 1,625,000 Kiziranfumbi disclosure along Atukunda wanseko road Road Kabaale Kiziran- fumbi from 25th Feb. to 5th Mar.19

08NOA 01SDA Facilitation for senstization prior 1451 Kabale- to verification and Hendricks 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030003 06-Mar-19 1,625,000 Kiziranfumbi disclosure along Nareeba wanseko road Road Kabaale Kiziran- fumbi from 25th Feb. to 5th Mar.19

08NOA 01SDA Facilitation for senstization prior 1451 Kabale- to verification and 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030004 06-Mar-19 815,000 Alex Mugisha Kiziranfumbi disclosure along wanseko road Road Kabaale Kiziran- fumbi from 25th Feb. to 5th Mar.19

Facilitation of Local leaders for varification and disclosure Accountant 1446L0519030005 sweepup and data 15-Mar-19 2,271,398 General E-Cash capture along

- MOFPED Wanseko Bu- gungu + Charges @ 0.951%

Facilitation of local leaders for forma- tion of Area Land Committee and senstization prior 1446L0519030006 to verification and disclosure along Buhimba Kakumiro road + charges at 0.951%

Facilitation to Local Leaders involved in engage-

Accountant 21-Mar-19 11,432,701 General E-Cash

- MOFPED

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1176 Hoima- Buhimba Ka- wanseko road kumiro road

ments for bound- Accountant Lusalira 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030007 ary opening along 15-Mar-19 2,432,919 General E-Cash Nkonge wanseko road Lusalila-Kasamb- - MOFPED Ssembabule ya-Nkonge-Sem- babule from 9th to 23rd March 2019

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation for senstisation for boundary open- Lusalira ing and obtaining 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030008 15-Mar-19 2,825,000 Fred Kansiime Nkonge Landlord consent wanseko road Ssembabule along Lusalila- Nkonge Sembab- ule from 9th to 23rd March 2019

66

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

senstisation for

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

boundary open- Dennis Lusalira ing and obtaining 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030009 15-Mar-19 2,825,000 Raymond Nkonge Landlord consent wanseko road Mugabo Ssembabule along Lusalila-

Nkonge Sembab- ule from 9th to 23rd March 2019

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation for senstisation for

boundary open- Lusalira ing and obtaining Moses 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030010 15-Mar-19 1,415,000 Nkonge Landlord consent Mugambwa wanseko road Ssembabule along Lusalila-

Nkonge Sembab- ule from 9th to 23rd March 2019

05NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

physical inspec- 1455 Hohwa tion by CGV Kalinaki Abdul 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030011 15-Mar-19 1,025,000 Nyairongo Hohwa Nyairongo Hakim wanseko road Kyarushesha Karushesha from

18th to 22nd March 2019

05NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

physical inspec- 1455 Hohwa tion by CGV Hendricks 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030012 15-Mar-19 1,025,000 Nyairongo Hohwa Nyairongo Nareeba wanseko road Kyarushesha Karushesha from

18th to 22nd March 2019

05NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

physical inspec- TOM JWAR- 1455 Hohwa tion by CGV 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030013 15-Mar-19 290,000 IRAKANWA Nyairongo Hohwa Nyairongo wanseko road MUGABE Kyarushesha Karushesha from

18th to 22nd March 2019

05NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

physical inspec- 1455 Hohwa tion by CGV Magembe Kato 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030014 15-Mar-19 662,000 Nyairongo Hohwa Nyairongo Tonny 59985 wanseko road Kyarushesha Karushesha from

18th to 22nd March 2019

05NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

physical inspec- 1455 Hohwa tion by CGV Namakula Mary 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030015 15-Mar-19 562,000 Nyairongo Hohwa Nyairongo Frances wanseko road Kyarushesha Karushesha from

18th to 22nd March 2019

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 67 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

05NOA 01 SDA

Facilitation for

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

physical inspec- 1455 Hohwa tion by CGV Mulindwa Jude 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030016 15-Mar-19 562,000 Nyairongo Hohwa Nyairongo Tadeo wanseko road Kyarushesha Karushesha from

18th to 22nd March 2019

05NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for

physical inspec- 1455 Hohwa tion by CGV 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519030017 15-Mar-19 286,000 Keera Moses Nyairongo Hohwa Nyairongo wanseko road Kyarushesha Karushesha from

18th to 22nd March 2019

Facilitation to support staff to

carry out bound- Accountant

1446L0519030055 ary opening along 29-Mar-19 2,826,628 General E-Cash

Masindi Biiso and

- MOFPED

Kabong Bypass + charges

Facilitation for

Local leaders

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

engagements with stakehold-

ers along Kabale 1446L0519040001 Kiziranfumbi and

Hohwa Nyairongo roads from 5th to 10th March 2019 + charges @ 0.951%

06NOA 01 SDA

Facilitation for

1451 Kabale-

Accountant Kiziranfumbi 1176 Hoima- 03-Apr-19 1,186,174 General E-Cash Road/ Hohwa wanseko road

- MOFPED Nyairongo

roads

identification, veri- 1455 Hohwa fication and disclo- Aggrey 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040002 05-Apr-19 1,225,000 Nyairongo sure of PAPs along Atukunda wanseko road Kyarushesha Hohwa Nyairongo

Karushesha from 1st to 7th April 2019

06NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for

identification, veri- 1455 Hohwa fication and disclo- Vivian Luswata 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040003 05-Apr-19 1,225,000 Nyairongo sure of PAPs along Komugisha wanseko road Kyarushesha Hohwa Nyairongo

Karushesha from 1st to 7th April 2019

06NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for

identification, veri- Tom 1455 Hohwa fication and disclo- 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040004 05-Apr-19 345,000 Jwarirakanwa Nyairongo sure of PAPs along wanseko road Mugabe Kyarushesha Hohwa Nyairongo

Karushesha from 1st to 7th April 2019

68

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

06NOA 01SDA Facilitation for land acquisition

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

and grievance 1455 Hohwa Henry 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040005 managementalong 05-Apr-19 1,225,000 Nyairongo Nkurunziza wanseko road Hohwa Nyairongo Kyarushesha Karushesha road from 1st to 7th April 2019

06NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for land acquisition and grievance 1455 Hohwa Felistas Mary 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040006 managementalong 05-Apr-19 1,225,000 Nyairongo Nafuna wanseko road Hohwa Nyairongo Kyarushesha Karushesha road from 1st to 7th April 2019

06NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for land acquisition and grievance 1455 Hohwa Ssekandi 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040007 managementalong 05-Apr-19 615,000 Nyairongo Robert 762036 wanseko road Hohwa Nyairongo Kyarushesha Karushesha road from 1st to 7th April 2019

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation for identification, verification and 1451 Kabale- Aggrey 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040008 disclosure of PAPs 05-Apr-19 2,825,000 Kiziranfumbi Atukunda wanseko road along Kabaale Road Kiziranfumbi road from 8th to 22nd April 2019

14NOA 01SDA Facilitation for identification, verification and 1451 Kabale- Hendricks 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040009 disclosure of PAPs 05-Apr-19 2,825,000 Kiziranfumbi Nareeba wanseko road along Kabaale Road Kiziranfumbi road from 8th to 22nd April 2019

14 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for identifi- cation, verification and

1451 Kabale- Vivian Luswata 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040010 disclosure of PAPs along 05-Apr-19 2,825,000 Komugisha wanseko road Kiziranfumbi Kabaale Kiziranfumbi Road road from 8th to 22nd April 2019

14NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for identification, verification and Tom 1451 Kabale- 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040011 disclosure of PAPs 05-Apr-19 1,415,000 Jwarirakanwa Kiziranfumbi wanseko road along Kabaale Mugabe Road Kiziranfumbi road from 8th to 22nd April 2019

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 69 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

03NOA 01 SDA Fa- cilitation for super- vision of identifica-

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

tion, verification 1446L0519040012 and disclosure of 05-Apr-19 625,000 PAPs along Kabale Kiziranfumbi road from 23rd to 26th April 2019

03NOA 01 SDA Fa- cilitation for super- vision of identifica- tion, verification 1446L0519040013 and disclosure of 05-Apr-19 625,000 PAPs along Kabale Kiziranfumbi road from 23rd to 26th April 2019

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for supervision of

1451 Kabale- Kalinaki Abdul 1176 Hoima- Kiziranfumbi Hakim wanseko road Road

1451 Kabale- Michael Ochola 1176 Hoima- Kiziranfumbi 762002 wanseko road Road

identification, 1451 Kabale- verification and Kazaara James 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040014 05-Apr-19 625,000 Kiziranfumbi disclosure of PAPs Azairwe wanseko road Road along Kabale Kiziranfumbi road from 23rd to 26th April 2019

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for supervision of identification, Mutabazi 1451 Kabale- verification and 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040015 05-Apr-19 315,000 Patrick Robert Kiziranfumbi disclosure of PAPs wanseko road 761973 Road along Kabale Kiziranfumbi road from 23rd to 26th April 2019

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for supervision of identification, Lusalira verification and Kalinaki Abdul 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040016 05-Apr-19 1,025,000 Nkonge disclosure of Paps Hakim wanseko road Ssembabule along Lusalira Nkonge road from 15th to 20th April 2019.

03NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for supervision of identification, Lusalira verification and Michael Ochola 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040017 05-Apr-19 1,025,000 Nkonge disclosure of Paps 762002 wanseko road Ssembabule along Lusalira Nkonge road from 15th to 20th April 2019.

70

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

03NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for supervision of

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

identification, Mutabazi Lusalira verification and 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040018 05-Apr-19 525,000 Patrick Robert Nkonge disclosure of Paps wanseko road 761973 Ssembabule along Lusalira Nkonge road from 15th to 20th April 2019.

08 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for issuance of vaca- Morgan 1446L0519040022 tion notices along 10-Apr-19 1,425,000 Habaasa Kabwoya Buhuka Ambrose road from 1st to 8th May 2019

08NOA 01SDA Facilitation for

1176 Hoima- Kabwoya wanseko road buhuka road

issuance of vaca- 1446L0519040023 tion notices along 10-Apr-19 1,425,000 Kabwoya Buhuka road from 1st to 8th May 2019

08 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for issuance of vaca- 1446L0519040024 tion notices along 10-Apr-19 1,425,000 Kabwoya Buhuka road from 1st to 8th May 2019

08 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for issuance of vaca- 1446L0519040025 tion notices along 10-Apr-19 715,000 Kabwoya Buhuka road from 1st to 8th May 2019

14 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for identification, disclosure and grievances man- 1446L0519040026 10-Apr-19 1,955,000 agement in land acquisition along Kabaale Kiziran- fumbi from 8th to 22nd April 2019

14 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for identification,

Olivia 1176 Hoima- Kabwoya Kwarikunda wanseko road buhuka road

Hudson 1176 Hoima- Kabwoya Bukenya wanseko road buhuka road

Morrish 1176 Hoima- Kabwoya Odich wanseko road buhuka road

Henry 1176 Hoima- Kabwoya Nkurunziza wanseko road buhuka road

disclosure and 1451 Kabale- grievances man- Musa Mubiru 1176 Hoima- 1446L0519040027 10-Apr-19 785,000 Kiziranfumbi agement in land Benz wanseko road Road acquisition along Kabaale Kiziran- fumbi from 8th to 22nd April 2019

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 71 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

14 NOA 01 SDA

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

Facilitation to officers to issue 1446L0519040028 vacation notices 11-Apr-19 2,825,000 to paid paps along Masindi Biiso from 10th - 28th April 2019

14 NOA 01SDA Facilitation to offic- ers to issue vaca- 1446L0519040029 tion notices to paid 11-Apr-19 2,825,000 paps along Masindi Biiso from 10th- 28 th April 2019

14 NOA 01 SDA

1446 Masindi Rhoda 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Natukunda wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Oguti Geoffrey 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Ojede 853307 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

Facilitation to officers to issue 1446L0519040030 vacation notices 11-Apr-19 675,000 Morrish Odich to paid paps along Masindi Biiso from 10 th - 28 th April 2019

Facilitation of local leaders for verification and disclosure sweepup and data capture for sup- plementary reports 1446L0519040031 along Kisanja Park Junction, Buliisa Park Junction and Wanseko Bugungu from 3rd to17th Feb 2019 + charges @ 0.951%

02 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for supervision, site inspection and

Accountant 11-Apr-19 2,094,733 General E-Cash

- MOFPED

technical meeting Mpora Asaph with project team 1446L0519040151 25-Apr-19 425,000 Koshaho for Masindi Kisanja 859640 Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa road project from 10th to 12th April 2019

05 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation vide

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

Kihaguzi Po- lice Post SD Ref 1446L0519050178 07/05/04/2019 28-May-19 1,325,000 along Masindi Kisanja Park Junc- tion from 27 th to 1 st June 2019.

1446 Masindi Wakoli Erina 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via W/595 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

72

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

05 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation vide

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

Kihaguzi Police Post SD 1446L0519050179 Ref 07/05/04/2019 28-May-19 1,025,000 along Masindi Kisanja Park Junc- tion from 27th ay to 1st June 2019.

05NOA 01SDA Facilitation vide

1446 Masindi Mugume 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Gordon wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

Kihaguzi Police Post SD 1446L0519050180 Ref 07/05/04/2019 28-May-19 290,000 Jimmy Ojok along Masindi Kisanja Park Junc- tion from 27th ay to 1st June 2019.

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

inspection and verification of sur- 1446L0719020009 vey works Masindi 25-Feb-19 800,000 Park Junction Paara Buliisa Bugungu from 13th to 16th Feb 19

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for inspection and verification of sur- 1446L0719020010 vey works Masindi 25-Feb-19 625,000 Park Junction Paara Buliisa Bugungu from 13th to 16th Feb 19

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for- inspection and verification of sur- 1446L0719020011 vey works Masindi 25-Feb-19 315,000 Park Junction Paara Buliisa Bugungu from 13th to 16th Feb 19

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation of Site

1446 Masindi Akuze Richard 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via 762006 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Moses 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Babikkako wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Mugendawala 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via William 872059 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

inspection and Mpora Asaph monthly review 1446W0519010001 30-Jan-19 625,000 Koshaho meeting Kisanja- 859640 Park Junction from 11th to 14th Dec. 2018

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation of Site inspection and Louis monthly review 1446W0519010002 30-Jan-19 625,000 Byaruhanga meeting Kisanja- Roy Park Junction from 11th to 14th Dec. 2018

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 73 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation of Site inspection and

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1446 Masindi monthly review 1446W0519010003 30-Jan-19 625,000 meeting Kisanja- Park Junction from 11th to 14th Dec. 2018

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation of Site inspection and

Tayebwa Asaph 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kamau wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi monthly review 1446W0519010004 30-Jan-19 625,000 Wilber Lukwago meeting Kisanja- Park Junction from 11th to 14th Dec. 2018

03 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation of Site inspection and monthly review 1446W0519010005 30-Jan-19 625,000 Brenda Okello meeting Kisanja- Park Junction from 11th to 14th Dec. 2018

04 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for site inspection and Mpora Asaph monthly review 1446W0519010006 30-Jan-19 825,000 Koshaho meeting Kisanja- 859640 Park Junction from 14th to18th Jan. 2019

04 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for site inspection and Louis monthly review 1446W0519010007 30-Jan-19 825,000 Byaruhanga meeting Kisanja- Roy Park Junction from 14th to18th Jan. 2019

04 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for site inspection and

1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi monthly review 1446W0519010008 30-Jan-19 825,000 meeting Kisanja- Park Junction from 14th to18th Jan. 2019

04 NOA 01 SDA Facilitation for site inspection and monthly review 1446W0519010009 30-Jan-19 825,000 meeting Kisanja- Park Junction from 14th to18th Jan. 2019

04NOA 01SDA

Tayebwa Asaph 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kamau wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Moses Kaggwa 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Luwemba wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

Facilitation for site inspection and 1446W0519010010 monthly review 30-Jan-19 825,000 Wilber Lukwago meeting Kisanja- Park Junction from 14 th to 18 th Jan. 2019

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

74

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

11NOA Facilitation for monthly super-

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1446 Masindi vision of Kisanja- 1446W0519010011 Park Junction from 15 th to 31 st January 2019

03NOA 01SDA

30-Jan-19 2,200,000 Deus Nuwagira

1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

Facilitation of site inspection and 1446W0519010012 mothly review 30-Jan-19 625,000 meeting Kisanja- Park Junction from 11 th -14 th Dec. 2018

04NOA 01SDA Site inspection and

1446 Masindi Moses Kaggwa 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Luwemba wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

monthly review meeting Masindi Mpora Asaph 1446W0519020012 Kisanja Park 25-Feb-19 825,000 Koshaho Junction and Tangi 859640 Junction Paraa Buliisa from 11th to 15th Feb. 2019

04NOA 01SDA Site inspection and

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

monthly review meeting Masindi 1446W0519020013 Kisanja Park 25-Feb-19 825,000 Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 11th to 15th Feb. 2019

04NOA 01SDA Site inspection and monthly review meeting Masindi 1446W0519020014 Kisanja Park 25-Feb-19 825,000 Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 11th to 15th Feb. 2019

04NOA 01SDA Site inspection and monthly review meeting Masindi 1446W0519020015 Kisanja Park 25-Feb-19 825,000 Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 11th to 15th Feb. 2019

11NOA Monthly facilitation for

1446 Masindi Joselyne 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kweera wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Moses Kaggwa 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Luwemba wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Brian Emmy 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Karugaba wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

project engineer Kisanja Park 1446W0519020016 Junction and Tangi 25-Feb-19 2,200,000 Deus Nuwagira Junction Paraa Buliisa Upgrade from 12th to 28th Feb.2019

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 75 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1446W0519020017	12 NOA Facilita- tion for conduct- ing stakeholder engagements on Kisanja Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 10 th to 22 nd Feb. 2019	25-Feb-19	2,425,000	Immaculate Kirungi	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	
1446W0519020019	02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for Quality control inspection along Masindi Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 11th to 13th Mar. 2019	06-Mar-19	215,000	Mwima Iman 872775	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	
1446W0519030001	02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for Quality control inspection along Masindi Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 11th to 13 th Mar. 2019	06-Mar-19	425,000	Nsubuga Geoffrey	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	
1446W0519030002	02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for Quality control inspection along Masindi Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 11th to 13 th Mar. 2019	06-Mar-19	425,000	Jimmy Okot T0086	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	
1446W0519030003	02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision site visit and stake- holder engage- ments along Masindi Kisanja Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa road from 25 th to 27 th Feb. 2019	06-Mar-19	215,000	Rayan Kajja	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	
1446W0519030004	02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision site visit and stake- holder engage- ments along Masindi Kisanja Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa road from 25th to 27th Feb. 2019	21-Mar-19	425,000	Mpora Asaph Koshaho 859640	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	




76

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

11NOA Facilitation for supervision of Masindi Kisanja

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1446 Masindi Park Junction 1446W0519030046 15-Mar-19 615,000 Michael Tafuma and Tangi Junc- tion Paraa Buliisa for the month of March 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision, site inspection and progressive review 1446W0519030047 meeting Masindi 15-Mar-19 615,000 James Senoga Kisanja Park Junction and Tanji Junction Paraa Buliisa for March 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision, site inspection and progressive review 1446W0519030048 meeting Masindi 15-Mar-19 615,000 James Gimadu Kisanja Park Junction and Tanji Junction Paraa Buliisa for March 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision,site inspection and progressive review 1446W0519030049 meeting Masindi 15-Mar-19 1,765,000 Deus Nuwagira Kisanja Park Junction and Tanji Junction Paraa Buliisa for March 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision,site inspection and progressive review Mpora Asaph 1446W0519030050 meeting Masindi 22-Mar-19 825,000 Koshaho Kisanja Park 859640 Junction and Tanji Junction Paraa Buliisa for March 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision,site

1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

inspection and progressive review 1446W0519030051 meeting Masindi 22-Mar-19 245,000 Kisanja Park Junction and Tanji Junction Paraa Buliisa for March 2019

1446 Masindi Joselyne 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kweera wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 77 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

11NOA Facilitation for project supervi- sion of Masindi

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1446 Masindi Kisanja Park 1446W0519030052 22-Mar-19 825,000 Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Bu- liisa for the Month of April 2019

02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for Site inspection and technical meeting 1446W0519030053 of Masindi Kisanja 22-Mar-19 825,000 Park Junction Tan- gi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 25 th to 27 th April 2019

02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for Site

Immaculate 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kirungi wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Kazaara James 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Azairwe wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

inspection and technical meeting 1446W0519030054 of Masindi Kisanja 22-Mar-19 825,000 Edgar Kaijuka Park Junction Tan- gi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 25th to 27 th April 2019

02NOA 01SDA 1446W0519040019 Facilitation for site 10-Apr-19 2,200,000 Deus Nuwagira inspection

03NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision and Site inspection and monthly review Mpora Asaph meeting along 1446W0519040020 10-Apr-19 425,000 Koshaho Masindi (Kisanja) 859640 Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa from 15 th to 18 th April 2019

02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision & site inspection of

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Masindi Kisanja 1446W0519040021 10-Apr-19 425,000 Park Junction (Lot

7. & Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa (Lot
8. from 14th to 16th May 2019

02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision and

Moses Kaggwa 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Luwemba wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

assessment of suitability of the Mpora Asaph 1446W0519040145 proposed location 24-Apr-19 425,000 Koshaho of quarries and 859640 campsites along Masindi Biiso, Kabale Kiziran- fumbi

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

78

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision and

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

assessment of suitability of the Mpora Asaph 1446W0519040146 proposed location 25-Apr-19 625,000 Koshaho of quarries and 859640 campsites along Masindi Biiso, Kabale Kiziran- fumbi

02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision and assessment of suitability of the Mpora Asaph 1446W0519050174 proposed location 28-May-19 425,000 Koshaho of quarries and 859640 campsites along Masindi Biiso, Kabale Kiziran- fumbi

02NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision and

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

assessment of suitability of the 1446W0519060001 proposed location 07-Jun-19 135,000 of quarries and campsites along Masindi Biiso, Kabale Kiziran- fumbi

03NOA 01SDA

1446 Masindi Tayebwa Asaph 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kamau wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Facilitation for 1446W0519060002 07-Jun-19 425,000 Brenda Okello supervision, site

1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison inspection Falls Park

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision, site inspection and monthly review 1446W0519060003 meeting of Masindi 07-Jun-19 Kisanja Park and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 10 th to 14 th June 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision, site inspection and monthly review 1446W0519060004 meeting of Masindi 07-Jun-19 Kisanja Park and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 10 th to 14 th June 2019

1446 Masindi Wycliffe 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via 135,000 Tumusiime wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Rhoda 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via 135,000 Natukunda wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 79 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision, site inspection and monthly review 1446W0519060005 meeting of Masindi 07-Jun-19 Kisanja Park and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 10 th to 14th June 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision ,site

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

1446 Masindi Kitimba Phillip 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via 625,000 Patrick 762208 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

inspection and monthly review Mpora Asaph 1446W0519060006 meeting of Masindi 20-Jun-19 825,000 Koshaho Kisanja Park and 859640 Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 10th to 14th June 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision, site

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

inspection and monthly review 1446W0519060007 meeting of Masindi 20-Jun-19 Kisanja Park and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 10th to 14 th June 2019

04NOA 01SDA Facilitation for supervision ,site inspection and monthly review 1446W0519060008 meeting of Masindi 20-Jun-19 Kisanja Park and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 10 th to 14 th June 2019

03NOA Facilitation for supervision on

1446 Masindi Joselyne 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via 825,000 Kweera wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

825,000 Deus Nuwagira

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

environmental and social compliance 1446W0519060009 assistance along 20-Jun-19 825,000 Kisanja Park Junc- tion Buliisa roads project from 26th to 29th June 2019.

03NOA Facilitation for supervision on environmental and social compliance 1446W0519060010 assistance along 20-Jun-19 825,000 Kisanja Park Junc- tion Buliisa roads project from 26 th to 29 th June 2019.

1446 Masindi Moses Kaggwa 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Luwemba wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Immaculate 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kirungi wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

80

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

03NOA Facilitation for supervision on

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

environmental and social compliance 1446W0519060011 assistance along 20-Jun-19 825,000 Kisanja Park Junc- tion Buliisa roads project from 26 th to 29 th June 2019.

03NOA Facilitation for supervision on

1446 Masindi Kazaara James 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Azairwe wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

environmental and social compliance Derrick 1446W0519060012 assistance along 20-Jun-19 600,000 Kayongo Kisanja Park Junc- Muwanguzi tion Buliisa roads project from 26th to 29 th June 2019.

03NOA + 01SDA Facilitation for supervision,site inspection & moni-

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi toring of ESS along 1446W0519060013 20-Jun-19 600,000 (Masindi) Kisanja Park Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa 17th to 20 th June 2019.

13NOA 03SDA

Joseph Asiimwe 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via UNRA/T0146 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

Facilitation for Masindi Monthly Supervi- Biiso, Kabaale sion of Masindi Biiso, Kabaale 1446W0519060014 20-Jun-19 600,000 Kiziranfumbi,

Kiziran- Jackie 1176 Hoima- fumbi, Hohwa Nantongo wanseko road Nyairongo Hohwa Nyai- Karushesha rongo Karushesha Ngogole oil Ngogole oil roads roads for June 2019.

08NOA 03SDA Facilitation for Masindi Monthly Supervi- Biiso,Kabaale sion of Masindi Biiso,Kabaale 1446W0519060015 20-Jun-19 300,000 Kiziranfumbi,

Kiziran- Epodoi Vincent 1176 Hoima- fumbi, Hohwa Alex wanseko road Nyairongo Hohwa Nyai- Karushesha rongo Karushesha Ngogole oil Ngogole oil roads roads for June 2019.

08NOA Facilitation 01SDA Facilitation for project supervi- tion of Masindi 1446W0519060016 Kisanja Park 22-Jun-19 625,000 Benard Matovu Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from18th to 21st

1446 Masindi 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 81 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

08NOA Facilitation 01SDA Facilitation

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

for project supervi- tion of Masindi 1446W0519060017 Kisanja Park 22-Jun-19 2,675,000 Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 18 th to 21 st

08NOA Facilitation 01SDA Facilitation for project supervi- tion of Masindi 1446W0519060018 Kisanja Park 22-Jun-19 1,675,000 Junction and Tangi Junction Paraa Buliisa roads from 18 th to 21 st

3NOA 1SDA fa- cilitation of staff to 1446W0519060024 22-Jun-19 415,000 Buhimba Nalweyo 04 - 08 July 2018

3NOA 1SDA fa- cilitation of staff to 1446W0719030056 05-Apr-19 625,000 Buhimba Nalweyo 04 - 08 July 2018

3NOA 1SDA fa-

1446 Masindi Tayebwa Asaph 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Kamau wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi Kitimba Phillip 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via Patrick 762208 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1449 Buhim- Lubega Joseph 1176 Hoima- ba-Nalweyo- 980748 wanseko road Kakumiro- Kakindu road

1446 Masindi Kansiime Enid 1176 Hoima- Bugungu via 761414 wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1446 Masindi cilitation of staff to 1446W0719030057 05-Apr-19 270,000 James Gimadu Buhimba Nalweyo 04 - 08 July 2018

5 NOA 1 SDA facilitation of staff Norman 1449W19070001 to Buhimba - 03-Aug-18 625,000 Byamukama Nalweyo-Bulamagi John 2 nd -7 th July 2018

1176 Hoima- Bugungu via wanseko road Murchison Falls Park

1449 Buhim- 1176 Hoima- ba-Nalweyo- wanseko road Kakumiro- Kakindu road

5 NOA 1 SDA facilitation of staff 1449W19070002 to Buhimba - 03-Aug-18 625,000 Nalweyo-Bulamagi 2 nd -7 th July 2018

3NOA 1SDA facili- tation to Buhimba 1449W19070003 Bulamagi for 03-Aug-18 315,000 safety monitoring on 3 - 6 July 2018

3NOA 1 SDA facilitation of staff to masindi Kisanja 1449W19070004 03-Aug-18 1,025,000 and Tangi park junction 10th-13th July2018

3NOA 1 SDA facilitation of staff to Masindi Kisanja 1449W19070005 03-Aug-18 1,025,000 and Tangi park junction 10 th -13 th July 2018

1449 Buhim- Ponsiano 1176 Hoima- ba-Nalweyo- Kiggundu wanseko road Kakumiro- Kakindu road

1449 Buhim- Mugwanya 1176 Hoima- ba-Nalweyo- Dennis 761542 wanseko road Kakumiro- Kakindu road

1449 Buhim- Nakonde 1176 Hoima- ba-Nalweyo- Zaituni 761824 wanseko road Kakumiro- Kakindu road

1449 Buhim- Paddy 1176 Hoima- ba-Nalweyo- Ahimbisibwe wanseko road Kakumiro- Kakindu road

82

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number	Description	Payment Date	Distribution Amount	Supplier	Project diverted From	Project diverted to	
1449W19070006	3NOA 1 SDA facilitation of staff to masindi Kisanja and Tangi park junction 10 th -13 th July2018	03-Aug-18	620,000	IRENE NYAK- WEZI	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1449 Buhim- ba-Nalweyo- Kakumiro- Kakindu road	
1452W19070001	3NOA 1 SDA facilitation of staff to masindi Kisanja and Tangi park junction 10th-13th July 2018	03-Aug-18	625,000	Mpora Asaph Koshaho 859640	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	
1452W19070002	3NOA 1 SDA facilitation of staff to masindi Kisanja and Tangi park junction 10th-13th July 2018	03-Aug-18	800,000	SERUMA MONI- CA ELIZABETH	1176 Hoima- wanseko road	1446 Masindi Bugungu via Murchison Falls Park	
1277W0519060007	Mota Engil IPC 44a 02nd install- ment payment Euro 270,039.70 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on KNBP	25-Jun-19	87,540,000	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	1490 Luwero Butalango	1277 Kampala Northern By- pass phase 2	
1056W0519080050	WHT Dott/General Nile IPC 23 Eur 93,584.01 Ishaka Kagamba	16-Aug-18	443,026,726	Uganda Rev- enue Authority	1403 Soroti- katakwi-Moroto Lokitonyala road	Ishaka kagamba	
1056W0519080048	Dott/General Nile IPC 23$ 1,835,569.02 + $35 bank charges @ 4,042.36 Ishaka Kagamba	15-Aug-18	3,644,223,921	General Nile Company for Roads & Bridges/Dott Services JV- (USD)	1403 Soroti- katakwi-Moroto Lokitonyala road	Ishaka kagamba	
1056L0519030003	Funds trnsferred to cater for compen- sation to 60 PAPs along Kamwenge FortPortal	21-Mar-19	391,881,021	UNRA Project Affected Per- sons Escrow	1510 UNRA re- tooling project	Kamwenge FortPortal road	
1056L0519030004	Funds transferred to cater for com- pensation to 100 PAPs along Gulu Atiak road	21-Mar-19	192,111,079	UNRA Project Affected Per- sons Escrow	1510 UNRA re- tooling project	Gulu Atiak Road	
1056W0519060021	CRSG-Final Cer- tificate Kamwenge Fortportal Road $ 1,759,232.40 + $35	22-Jun-19	358,311,643	China Railway Seventh Group Co. Ltd.	0267 Improve- ment of ferry services	FortPortal road	
1277W0519060006	Mota Engil IPC 44a 01st install- ment payment Euro 5,477,391.14 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on KNBP	25-Jun-19	292,327,593	Mota-Engil Engenharia & Construction S.A	0267 Improve- ment of ferry services	1277 kampla northern by- pass phase 2	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 83

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Invoice Number Description Payment Date

Mota Engil IPC

Distribution Project Project Supplier Amount diverted From diverted to

44a 01st install- ment payment 1277W0519060006 Euro 5,477,391.14 25-Jun-19 5,684,860,285 @ 4,262.02 + $ 35 @ 3,824.74 Works on

KNBP

Mota-Engil 0267 Improve- 1277 kampla Engenharia & ment of ferry northern by- Construction services pass phase 2 S.A

Being payment for 0267 Improve- Registrar High 1056L0519060066 Court fees UNRA V 25-Jun-19 103,389,000 ment of ferry Court fees Court Turigye Evans services

Total 341,241,512,345

84

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Appendix 4: URF Diverted Amount

Description/ Purpose	Description	EFT NO	Amount (UGX)	Code charged	Right code	
Ground breaking ceremony for Kapchorwa-Suam Road Project	Advertising and Public Relation	19120139	670,000	221001	227001	
Advance to cater for welfare in the Executive Office	Advertising and Public Relation	22846490	1,500,000	221001	221009	
Advance for refreshments - Executive office Q1 FY 2018/19	Advertising and Public Relation	18574138	1,905,000	221001	221009	
Contribution towards completion of St. Paul`s Cathedral - Kasese District	Advertising and Public Relation	21797715	2,000,000	221001	282101	
Advance for refreshments - Board meetings Q1 FY2018/19	Advertising and Public Relation	18574138	3,800,000	221001	221009	
Geo-mapping of regional and na- tional road maps for URF fact sheet	Advertising and Public Relation	18574128	4,000,000	221001	227001	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities	Allowances	21797724	720,000	211103	221003	
Consultancy services for Technical Support Units (TSUs) and DUCAR Agencies	Allowances	24328683	2,288,136	211103	225001	
Advertising in the Engineers Journal of October 2018	Allowances	20623941	2,484,000	211103	221001	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities	Allowances	21797763	2,608,000	211103	221003	
Top-Up facilitation training in Develpoment Evaluation	Allowances	24268120	3,291,455	211103	221003	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher and Field activities	Allowances	22466985	3,340,000	211103	227001	
Advance for compiling Performance agreements and work plans FY 2018/2019	Allowances	18393543	3,600,000	211103	227001	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities	Allowances	21797751	3,750,000	211103	221003	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher and Field activities	Allowances	22466986	4,200,000	211103	221009	
Top-Up facilitation training in Advanced Corporate Governance	Allowances	24268107	5,072,282	211103	221003	
Facilitation for the URF Leadership and Management training.	Allowances	24268097	7,292,000	211103	221003	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher and Field activities	Allowances	22466952	8,000,000	211103	221003	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities	Allowances	21797706	8,820,000	211103	221003	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities	Allowances	21797707	9,389,000	211103	221003	
Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities	Allowances	21797748	9,500,000	211103	221003	




A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 85

for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Code Description/ Purpose Description EFT NO Amount (UGX) Right code charged

Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities

Advance to cater for RUSS Refresher training & Field activities

Facilitation Conference for Internal auditors in all Road Funds in Africa

Allowances 21797762 9,568,000 211103 221003 Allowances 21797734 9,670,000 211103 221003 Allowances 24268095 18,376,225 211103 221002

Funds disbursement study 2018/19, Computer Supplies and IT Leg 2 Services

Scooping exercise Audit of DAs FY 2019/20 Leg 1

Scooping exercise Audit of DAs FY 2019/20 Leg 1

Field inspection to review DRC's functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019

Tracking of Routine and P.M works undertaken by UNRA in Qtr 3

Field inspection to review DRC's functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019

Hotel and Conference facilities for a Road Safety Training workshop in Eastern Uganda

Field inspection to review DRC's functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019

Field inspection to review DRC's functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 ARMP of selected Agencies.

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 ARMP of selected Agencies.

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 ARMP of selected Agencies.

Field inspection to review DRC's functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019

Tracking of Routine and P.M works undertaken by UNRA in Qtr 3

Tracking of Routine and P.M works undertaken by UNRA in Qtr 3

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 ARMP of selected Agencies.

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19

Computer Supplies and IT Services

Computer Supplies and IT Services

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- Short

Consultancy Services- ARMP of selected Agencies. Short

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 Consultancy Services- ARMP of selected Agencies. Short

Field inspection to review DRC's Consultancy Services- functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019 Short

Facilitation for Road Safety Capacity Consultancy Services- building - Eastern Short

Facilitation for Road Safety Capacity Consultancy Services- building - Northern Uganda Short

23746618 6,000,000 221008 225001 24268114 8,060,000 221008 227001 24268354 8,280,000 221008 227001 21256995 630,000 225001 227001 21257015 630,000 225001 227001 21257053 630,000 225001 227001

24268093 723,510 225001 221002

21257048 1,050,000 225001 227001 21257073 1,260,000 225001 227001 23023750 1,260,000 225001 227001 23023758 1,260,000 225001 227001 23023766 1,260,000 225001 227001 21257050 1,260,000 225001 227001 21256995 1,260,000 225001 227001 21257050 1,260,000 225001 227001 23023760 1,260,000 225001 227001

23023764 225001 227001 1,540,000

23023757 225001 227001 1,820,000

21257002 225001 227001 1,960,000

22709793 225001 227001 2,000,000

23337036 225001 227001 2,000,000

86

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Code Description/ Purpose Description EFT NO Amount (UGX) Right code charged

Field inspection to review DRC's Consultancy Services-

functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019 Short

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 Consultancy Services-

ARMP of selected Agencies. Short

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 Consultancy Services-

ARMP of selected Agencies. Short

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 Consultancy Services-

ARMP of selected Agencies. Short

Monitoring Exercise of Qtr 3 2018/19 Consultancy Services-

ARMP of selected Agencies. Short

Facilitation for Road Safety Capacity Consultancy Services-

building - Northern Uganda Short

21257038 225001 227001 2,520,000

23072350 225001 227001 5,010,000

23072347 225001 227001 5,010,000

23072356 225001 227001 6,250,000

23023753 225001 227001 6,410,000

23337020 225001 227001 9,000,000

Facilitation for Road Safety Capacity Consultancy Services- 21257013 225001 227001 Building. Short 9,000,000

Field inspection to review DRC's Consultancy Services-

functionality in Qtr 3 FY 2018/2019 Short

21257001 225001 227001 18,930,000

Supply and delivery of desktop computers and laptops

Consultancy services for Technical

Furniture and Fixtures 21719282

Support Units (TSUs) and DUCAR Furniture and Fixtures 24328683

Agencies Invoice:4

312203 221008 608,828

312203 225001 3,355,932

Contracts committee allowance Staff Training 20778835 221003 211103 222-229 meeting 546,000

Contracts committee allowance Staff Training 20778828 221003 211103 222-229 meeting 560,000

Contracts Committee allowances 222 nd -229 th meetings Field audit & verification of Emergency funding Leg 2 PAYE on Contracts committee allowance 222-229 meeting Telephone bills for February to May

2019

Staff Training 20778815 221003 211103 560,000

Staff Training 23746613 221003 227001 880,000

Staff Training 20784349 221003 211103 1,248,000

Staff Training 24328684 221003 222001 2,073,375

Board of Survey 2018/19 Subscriptions 24268119 1,500,000 221017 211103 Facilitation to attend Accelerated training at CADD Center Facilitation to attend the ASAPU workshop Facilitation training in Procurement & Supply chain in SA Hotel and conference facilities for URF staff retreat 2019 Hotel and conference facilities for URF staff retreat 2019 Purchase of new laptop for M & E Department Purchase of new laptop for M & E Department

Total

Subscriptions 22605938 221017 221003 1,590,000

Subscriptions 22605936 221017 221002 1,624,000

Subscriptions 24268117 221017 221003 20,326,355

Travel Inland 22199144 227001 221002 7,341,877

Travel Inland 22199144 227001 221002 40,788,208

18877780 312213 221008 639,191

18877780 312213 221008 3,551,062

320,570,436

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 87 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Appendix 5: Entity delays in procurement process.

Contract Amount Reference Number Activity (UGX/USD)

Civil Aviation Authority

Initiation Date Contract Signing Time Taken

CAA/WRKS/17- Ground maintenance of 18/00033 upcountry aerodromes

Civil Works 2nd Floor CAA/WRKS/16- Passenger Terminal 17/00067 Building

CAA/SU- Supply of Runway PLS/17-18/00130 materials

CAA/WRKS/15- Relocation of Arua 16/00046 Airfield to Anai

Land Acquisition for the expansion of Arua Airport as dictated by the Master plan (Con- sultancy)

926,821,608 Dec 2017 Pending On going

145,162,479 November 2016 September 2018 19 months

October 2017 September 2018 12 months 4,613,676,938 October 2017 Pending On going

September 2017 October 2018 12 months

Supply and Installation CAA/SU- of flood lighting mast on 288,626,236 PLS/13-14/00078 Bay 11

Improvement of pave- ment edges, access CAA/WRKS/15- ramps and the fence at 669,383,875 16/00027 Entebbe International Airport

Ministry of Works and Transport

2013/14 March 2018 43 months 2015/16 November 2017 18 months

Four bombardier MoWT/SU- CRJ900 Series aircraft $27.7m 2017 July 2018 6 months PLS/2017-18/00538 Lot 1

Lot 1: Construction of Kisaigi Bridge in Kakumiro MoWT/WRKS/2017- Lot 2: Construction of 18/00315 Kabindula swamp in Kyankwanzi; Construc- tion of Bwambala swamp

The validation of the MoWT/NCONS/16 - midterm review of the 17/00412/28 National transport master plan

Services for the design

3,759,095,036 2017 June 2018 6 months

16,207,536 2016 August 2018 18 months

construction and MoWT/CONS/16- supervision of a bulding 1,899,586,615 17/00466 to Uganda Computerised Driving permit facility

Uganda National Roads Authority

Package 5 Critical Oil Roads: Design and Build of Masindi- Biiso Road Upgrading Project

2016 August 2018 20 months

UNRA/Works/16 - (54km) Kabale-Kiziran- 17/00110/05 fumbi, Hohwa-Nyairon- go-Kyarushesha-Butole and Kaseeta-Lwera Road Upgrading Project (68km)

504,861,701,727 2017 March 2019 17 Months

88

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Contract Amount Reference Number Activity (UGX/USD)

Kampala Flyover Construction and Road

Upgrading Project Lot 1: UNRA/WORKS/16 - (Package 1: Clock Tower 307,198,007,663 17/00127 Flyover & Package 2:

Nsambya Mukwano Road

Mechanised Mtnce of

Selected Unpaved Na-

Initiation Date Contract Signing Time Taken 2017 September 2018 9 Months

UNRA/WORKS/16 - tional Roads under FWC

17/00018/01 for 3 years totalling to

243 Km Lot 01: Kampala Station

Mechanised Mtnce

16,272,357,363 2017 July 2018 7 Months

of Selected Unpaved UNRA/WORKS/16 - National Roads under 33,671,161,468 2017 August 2018 8 Months 17/00018/13 FWC for 3 years. Lot 13:

Mbarara (1) Station

Civil Works for Upgrad-

ing of Rukungiri-Kihihi- UNRA/WORKS/17 - Ishasha/Kanungu Road 207,834,646,967 2017 September 2018 9 Months 18/00002 (78.5km) to Bituminous

Standards. Source: OAG Analysis of procurement files for sampled projects FY 2018/19.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 89 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











Appendix 6: Inconsistences in reporting of achieved targets

ENTITY	OUTPUTS	REPORTED SECTOR PERFORMANCE	REPORTED ENTITY PERFORMANCE	
Ministry of Works and Transport	Development of Bu- kasa port	Resettlement action plan ap- proved by chief government valuer.Environment and social impact assessment (ESIA) was approved by NEMA.Construction of Access road to Bukasa port (Kinawataka – Bu- kasa road -8km) 35% attained.	Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) study report for Bukasa approved and im- plementation commenced.Detailed engineering design for the new Kampala port at Bukasa com- pleted but awaiting Ministry approval.Dredging and surcharging contract has been signed and works to begin after RAP implementation of the dredging area surrounding.4.8% of civil works on the access road completed	
	Development of Kabaale International Airport	Completed 27.65% physical works of phase 1 out of the planned 30% for FY 2018/19	27.65% physical works for the devel- opment of Kabaale airport phase 1 competed	
	Standard Gauge Railway	120.603 hectares of right of way were acquired against a target of 570.4 hectares due to limited funding640 PAPs were compensated	19.898 acres were acquired. 61 PAPs were compensated	
	Construction of one stop border posts (OSBPs)	90% construction works for Katuna OBSP (Phase 1) were completed90% construction works for the exit road road at Malaba OSBP completed.Designs for Goli and Ntoroko OSBPs completed.Phase 1 of Elegu completed with phase ii (staff accommodation block and warehouses) to be com- pleted in September.	90% construction works for Katuna OSBP (Phase 1 completed.90% Construction works for the exit road at Malaba OSBP completed.Designs for Goli and Ntoroko OSBPs completed.Defects liability period for Elegu OSBP monitored.	




90

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











ENTITY OUTPUTS

Uganda

REPORTED SECTOR PERFORMANCE

Constituted a Board of Directors.

Two Bombardier CRJ900 aircraft were delivered.

REPORTED ENTITY PERFORMANCE Key staff recruited.

Operations of the Uganda National Airline supported

National Airlines Two bombardier CRJ900 aircraft Acquired Air Operator Certificate Company Limited delivered. (AOC) for commercial flight

District , Urban and Community Access Roads (Rehabilitation of Ducar)

Ministry of Works and Transport

District , Urban and Community Access Roads ( District Road Equipment)

Recruited and trained key staff for the National Airline

809.12 km of community access roads were improved in fifty four selected districts under intercon- nectivity project.

347.4 km of district roads were opened and 252.5 km of those were graveled in all regions under force account.

Under Jinja unit, 132.26 km were opened , 116.16 km were graded and 66.29 km graved out of 329.39 km targeted under force account.

96.13% average availability of the road equipment from Japan at- tained out of the targeted percent- age of 96%.

55 No. ( 50 minor and 5 major) re- pairs of the zonal road equipment from China were done.

538 out of 600 targeted road equipment operators from local government were trained.

Paving works for the workshop yards Mbarara and Gulu regional mechanical workshop was done and completed.

The five phase process for air opera- tor certificate (AOC) ongoing.

Rehabilitation works of under 100km under interconnectivity project completed.

150kn of roads opened, compacted and graveled under force account.

24 minor repairs for district equip- ment from China undertaken.

21 major repairs for district equip- ment from China undertaken.

10 minor repairs for zonal / force ac- count equipment from China under- taken.

Paving works for the workshop yard at Mbarara RMWS supervised and monitored.

Paving works for the workshop yard at Gulu RMWS supervised and moni- tored.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 91 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











ENTITY	OUTPUTS	REPORTED SECTOR PERFORMANCE	REPORTED ENTITY PERFORMANCE	
Ministry of Works and Transport	DUCAR (construction of selected Bridges on DUCAR network	5 bridges were substantially completed ; Saaka swamp Phase II (Kaliiro district), Okokor Bridge (Kumi) and Kaguta bridge (Lira/ Otuke ), Kibembe and Tongole cable foot bridges( Sironko and Manafwa districts)a. Kabindula bridge – (75%) b. Kangai swamp (55%)c. Wangobo- Nsonkwe –Namu- nyumya swamp crossing Iganga (45%)d. Muzizi Bridge (Kibaale) (25%) e. Amodo swamp 5% f. Kabuhuuna -70% g. Bambala bridge 90%h. Kisaigi bridge -80%	3 ongoing bridge constructions and swamp crossing projects supervised and monitored. (Gem farm, B2P,Sigwa hill and Lejenyahi metallic ladders)Bridge management system yet to be installed.7 feasibility /design studies for new bridge projects conducted and reports produced.Bambala 9% construction civil works progress achieved.Kabindula 5% physical civil works progress achieved.17% construction works on Kisaigi bridge completed.Sezibwa swamp site handed over to contractor and works commenced.Wangobo–Nsonkwe–Namuyumya swamp crossing between Bugiri and Iganga 21% civil works completed by force account.Sites for Aleles bridge (Paliisa Dis- trict) Buhindaganye bridge (Rubirizi/ Ibanda district) and Kyabahanga bridge handed over and works commenced.Site for Ojonai bridge handed over to contractor and works commenced.Gem farm Bridge 15% of civil works completed- abutments completed and filling of approach roads ongoing.Kangai swamp 5% of cumulative civil works completed2 Cable bridges completed.	
Uganda National Roads Authority	Roads construction	Six roads construction projects ( 420.1 km ) were substantially completed22 ongoing road projects ( new construction and upgrading ) covering a total of 1,600km at various stages of progressProportion of road works executed during FY 2018/19 was estimated to be equivalent to 344.4 km out of the annual target of 400km – equivalent. Total stock of paved roads now stands at 4,971km (23.8%)		




92

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











ENTITY OUTPUTS

Studies and designs undertaken

Uganda National Roads Authority

Ferry development

REPORTED SECTOR PERFORMANCE

Studies and designs for 20 roads project sand bridges (preliminary designs) completed. These projects include express ways, road upgrading, town roads, and new construction.

A new ferry i.e Sigulu ferry that will connect Namayingo district to the islands of Dolwe and Sigulu was fully assembled and trials conducted.

79.3% of financed quantity Routine maintenance achieved by Q3. (Manual km ) (23,576km )

REPORTED ENTITY PERFORMANCE

Sigulu ferry - 98% of ferry construction works completed.

Financed routine maintenance manual of 26,264km of district roads.

Financed routine maintenance of 716km paved and 305km unpaved KCCA roads.

60% of financed quantity achieved Routine mechanized maintenance Routine maintenance Uganda Road Fund (Mechanized km) by Q3. of 77km paved and 305km unpaved (9568km) KCCA roads.

Civil Aviation Authority

Uganda Railways Corporation

37.5% of financed quantity Periodic maintenance achieved by Q3. (unpaved km) (1988km)

70.6% of financed quantity Culvert installations achieved by Q3. (Lines) (5248 lines)

67.5% completed Expansion and (Taxiway extension, access road upgrade of Entebbe

- 100% ; cargo termina l- 77%, International Airport service road – 83%; runway 12/30
- 85% complete).

60% completed (works for 3rd floor roof structure connecting Improvement of bridge and fire hydrant – 100% departures at EIA done; elevated access road at 60% physical progress).

80% completed Search park at EIA Search park shelter - 100%, extra 2 lanes /road - 80% complete

Construction of the Apron at Arua Airport 85% works complete. Phase II

Perimeter fencing of Gulu Airport (Phase 30% works complete. II) Fencing of the re- cently acquired land

Rehabilitation and 100% works on Budambuli, drainage improve- Nagongera and Namanve were ment of the railway completed in Feb – March 2019. line at Magamaga, Magamaga was delated by un- Budumbuli, availability of the engineering Nagongera and train. Namanve.

Financed periodic maintenance of 28,082km of municipal roads duplicated.

Financed installations of 5781 lines.

67.5% progress (Taxiway extension, access road - 100%; cargo terminal - 77%, service road – 83%; runway 12/30 - 85% progress).

60% progress (works for 3rd floor roof structure connecting bridge and fire hydrant – 100% done; elevated access road at 60% physical progress).

80% progress Search park shelter - 100%, extra 2 lanes /road - 80% progress.

45% works completed by the 4th quarter.

65% works completed by the 4th quarter.

250km of main line averagely main- tained, Namanve drainage newly constructed, Magamaga drainage reconstructed.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 93 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











REPORTED SECTOR ENTITY OUTPUTS PERFORMANCE

Supply and Installa- tion of pre cast con- crete railway reserve 100% boundary markers, Phase III.

Renovation of the Kampala goods shed Uganda Railways warehouses (Phase Corporation 1), portbell ware- houses and associ- ated buildings, and Mombasa house.

Supply of Ballast and Timber sleepers.

Source: OAG Analysis of performance reports.

100% Portbell renovated, the ware- houses, guard house, toilet block, driveway pavement and fencing works.

100%

REPORTED ENTITY PERFORMANCE

1,088 (100%) reinforced concrete boundary markers erected along 64km of the railway reserve from Iganga to Nagongera.

Fencing works of the Kampala good shed.

Ballast was purchased but not concluded. Delivery of tract materials was expected in September 2019.

94

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General











Annexture 1: EIA field inspections

DESIGN AND BUILD OF ENTEBBE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT UPGRADING AND EXPANSION PROJECT

The design and build of Entebbe International Airport (EIA) project is being implemented by Civil

Aviation Authority (CAA) at a contract price of USD 200,000,000 and supervised by Dar Al-Handasah

(Shair & Partners) supervising consultants’ at a supervision cost of USD 1,183,821,789 VAT Inc.

At the time of audit in October 2019 physical progress was at 64% as reported in the June 2019 progress report.

MODIFICATION OF THE PASSENGER TERMINAL BUILDING AT ENTEBBE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

The Contract for the Modification of the Passenger Terminal Building (PTB) at Entebbe International

Airport (EIA) is being executed by Seyani Brothers & Co. (U) Limited at a contract value UGX. 42,695,026,700 tax inclusive with Ssentoogo & Partners Limited as the supervising consultants at a

supervision cost of UGX 1,183,821,789, tax inclusive. At the time of audit (5th to 27th August 2019) physical progress of the works reported in the June progress report was at 42.193% with a time lapse of 85.7% while the financial progress was reported at 23.08%.

S/No Observation Evidence

New cargo building –Operator 1 import area 1 Visible cracks running perpendicular to slab span on 6 slab panels located at

Honeycombs on floodlight stand 2 concrete base.

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by | the Works and Transport Sector 95 for the Financial Year 2018/19 A Report by the Auditor General











S/No Observation Evidence

Apron 1 concrete slab 3 Honeycombs on

96

A Value For Money Audit Report on the Assessment of Budget Performance by the Works and Transport Sector

for the Financial Year 2018/19 | A Report by the Auditor General









































Audit House, Plot 2c Apollo Kaggwa Road, P.O. Box 7083 Kampala,

Tel: 041-7-336000, Fax: +256-41-435674, Email: info@oag.go.ug, Website: www.oag.go.ug











