THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MASAKA – BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT (PROJECT ID NO. 0746)

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2019

OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL UGANDA

1











TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS - 3
Opinion - 4
Basis of Opinion - 4
Key Audit Matters - 4
Emphasis of Matter - 4
  1. Utilization of Loan disbursement amounts-UGX.286,702,781 - 5
Other Information - 5
Responsibilities of the Accounting Officer for the Financial Statements - 6
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements - 6
Other Reporting Responsibilities - 7
Report on Compliance with Legislation and Funding Requirements - 8
  2. Delays in project commencement - 8
  3. Slow Physical Progress of works - 8
  4. Land Compensation - 9
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE INTERNAL CONTROL STRUCTURE OF MASAKA-
BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT (PROJECT ID NO.0746) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2019 - 11
Opinion - 11
Management Responsibility - 11
Auditor’s Responsibility - 11
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE SPECIAL ACCOUNT OPERATIONS OF MASAKA –
BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT (PROJECT ID NO.0746) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2019 - 13
Opinion - 13
Management Responsibility for the Special Account Statement - 13
Auditor’s Responsibility - 13

2











LIST OF ACRONYMS

Acronym	Meaning	
BADEA	Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa	
GoU	Government of Uganda	
ISA	International Standards on Auditing	
ISSAIs	International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions	
IESBA	International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants	
MOFPED	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development	
UGX	Uganda Shillings	
UMMDAP	Urban Markets and Marketing Development of Agricultural Products Project	
US $	United States Dollar	




3











REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MASAKA – BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT (PROJECT ID NO. 0746)

FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 th JUNE, 2019

THE RT. HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT Opinion

I have audited the accompanying financial statements of Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project Id No. 0746), implemented by Uganda National Roads Authority, which comprise of the Statement of receipts and payments for the year ended 30 th June 2019, Statement of Fund Balances, Statement of comparative budget and actual performance, Statement of BADEA disbursements, Statement of BADEA loan balances together with other accompanying statements for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the financial statements present fairly in all material respects, the financial performance of Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project Id No. 0746) and the Fund balances for the year ended 30 th June 2019, in accordance with the BADEA guidelines and the cash basis of accounting described under note 8 to the financial statements.

Basis of Opinion

I conducted my audit in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs). My responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statement’s section of my report. I am independent of the Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project Id No. 0746), implemented by Uganda National Roads Authority in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) as amended, the National Audit Act, 2008, the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (Parts A and B) (IESBA Code), the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) Code of Ethics and other independence requirements applicable to performing audits of Financial Statements in Uganda. I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA Code, and in accordance with other ethical requirements applicable to performing audits in Uganda. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Key Audit Matters

Key audit matters are those matters that, in my professional judgment, are of most significance in my audit of the financial statements of the current period. I have determined that there are no Key Audit Matters to communicate in my report.

Emphasis of Matter

Without qualifying my opinion, I draw attention to the following matter presented in the financial statements that, in my judgement, is of such importance and fundamental to users’ understanding of the financial statements:

4











1. Utilization of Loan disbursement amounts-UGX.286,702,781

During the financial year 2018/19 BADEA disbursed total of USD 74,560; USD 45,580 on 1 st July, 2018 and USD 29,000 on 16 th October 2018, equivalent to UGX.286,702,781 as support to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). funds and utilization:

The Table below shows the receipt of the

Payment Date	Disbursed Amount ($)	Exchange Rate (UGX)	Equivalent UGX	Amount Utilized (UGX)	Percentage of utilization %	
01/07/2018	45,580	3,884.29	177,045,938			
16/10/2018	29,000	3,783.88	109,732,520			
16/10/2018	-20	3,793.88	-75,678			
Totals	74,560		286,702,781	50,032,011	17.5	




From the above table, only 17.5% of the funds was utilized by the time of the audit while 82.5% remained unutilized. This is majorly attributed to failure by the employer to recruit other PIU personnel. Since January 2017, the project has only had one PIU staff that is, the Project accountant contrary to the loan agreement.

Furthermore, according to the loan agreement, the borrower is required to pay interest at a rate of 1% p.a on the principal amount of loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time. In light of the above, GOU is paying interest on funds not yet utilized therefore no value for money disbursed is being achieved.

Apart from delayed procurement of the Road contractor, funds utilization, project implementation and monitoring have been partly affected by delayed recruitment of staff. Monies left unspent on the account are susceptible to misallocation by the implementing agency.

Management acknowledged the observation, and explained that the finalization of PIU establishment by UNRA awaits a No Objection from BADEA.

I advised the Accounting Officer to; a) Expedite the process of establishment of the PIU b) Appropriately utilize the disbursed funds to avoid any additional costs that may be accrued due to extension of project timelines.

Other Information

The Accounting Officer is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the statement of responsibilities of the Accounting Officer and the commentaries by the Head of Accounts and the Accounting Officer, and other supplementary information. The other information does not include the financial statements and my auditors’ report thereon.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

5











In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially consistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work I have performed, I conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information; I am required to report that fact. I have nothing to report in this regard.

Responsibilities of the Accounting Officer for the Financial Statements

Under Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 (as amended) and Section 45 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Accounting Officer is accountable to Parliament for the funds and resources of Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project ID No. 0746).

The Accounting Officer is also responsible for the preparation of financial statements in accordance with the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, BADEA guidelines and the cash basis of accounting described in note 8 to the financial statements, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatements, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, the Accounting Officer is responsible for assessing the Project’s ability to continue delivering its mandate, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to affecting the delivery of the mandate of the Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project Id No. 0746), and using the BADEA Guidelines, and Government of Uganda Financial Regulations unless the Accounting Officer has a realistic alternative to the contrary.

The Accounting Officer is responsible for overseeing the Project’s financial reporting process.

Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements

My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISSAIs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with ISSAIs, I exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:

- Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.

6











- Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Project’s internal control.

- Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by management.

- Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Project’s ability to deliver its mandate. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project Id No. 0746) to fail to deliver its mandate.

- Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with the Accounting Officer regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.

I also provide the Accounting Officer with a statement that I have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with him/her all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on my independence, and where applicable, related safeguards.

From the matters communicated with the Accounting Officer, I determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. I describe these matters in my auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, I determine that a matter should not be communicated in my report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.

Other Reporting Responsibilities

In accordance with sections 19(1) of the National Audit Act, 2008, I report to you, based on my work described on the audit of Financial Statements that;

Except for the matters raised in the compliance with legislation and funding requirements section below, and whose effect has been considered in forming my opinion on the financial statements, the activities, financial transactions and information reflected in the financial statements that have come to my notice during the audit, are in all material respects, in compliance with the authorities which govern them.

7











Report on Compliance with Legislation and Funding Requirements

The material findings in respect of the compliance criteria for the applicable subject matters are as follows;

2. Delays in project commencement

According to the loan agreement Annex II (project description), the project was expected to commence by July 2013. However review of the project documents revealed delays in commencement of the project, the project commenced in January 2019. This was over 6 years after the initial loan agreement was signed with BADEA and OFID. Table below refers;

Loan Agreement	Date Of Signing Agreement	Initial End Date Of Agreement	Grace Period	
BADEA (40% of LOAN)	12 th Oct 2012	31 st March 2015	10 years from 1 st withdrawal of loan amount	
OFID (50% of LOAN)	29 th Jan 2013	31 Dec 2016	5 years from date of signing of agreement	




Delays in commencement of the project are attributed to lengthy procurement processes coupled with delays in securing no-objections at crucial stages in procurement from the funders. These were observed when procuring both the project consultant and contractor. The project agreed timelines were not maintained. The implementation delays result in extra costs in form of allowances of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), delays in provision of services and also reduced loan grace period.

Management explained that the following are being undertaken to mitigate the delays: i) A project peer review team was constituted to expeditiously conclude the design review. ii) Structured Project Management meetings to ensure timely responses to issues affecting project progress. iii) Continuous analysis of the Contractors’ work program to mitigate potential project delays. iv) Monthly performance assessment of the Contractor and Consultant, and which has seen staff replacement with associated improvements in management of site activities, v) Weekly technical meetings and use of project management tools developed by the Directorate to ensure smooth project delivery.

I advised the Accounting Officer to hasten implementation of the project to ensure benefits are reaped before the borrower begins to repay the loan.

3. Slow Physical Progress of works

UNRA entered into a contract with Arab contractors on 17 th Sept 2018 for upgrading of Masaka-Bukakata road (41km) under civil works procurement reference No. UNRA/WORKS/2016-17/00116 at a contract amount of UGX.165,325,096,327 (VAT exclusive). The contract period is 24 months, with a start date of 2nd January 2019 and completion date of 1st January 2021, and 12 months as defects liability period. For the year ended 2018/19, the implementation of the project was planned at 1.69% of actual works and these mainly involved ancillary road works such as clearing and grubbing, removal of Topsoil, roadbed preparation, de-stumping and G7 fill.

8











However by 30 th June 2019 actual progress was stated to be at 0.25% recording a slippage of 1.44% of total works as per the performance status in the Financial Statements. It was noted that this was below expectation since 180 days representing 24.6% of overall contract duration had elapsed since commencement of works.

The slow physical progress at the time was attributed to the following; a) Delayed relocation of utilities (electricity and water lines) by the different parties along the project alignment. b) Delayed installation of stone crusher plant. c) Delays in obtaining NEMA approval for authorization to exploit the quarry. d) Delays in finalization of the design report. e) Heavy rainfalls during the period that disrupted the progress of works.

Delays in physical works may lead to delayed project completion, and subsequently negatively impacting on project objectives.

Management explained that a construction compliance-monitoring tool was developed, and also in use is an issues log. Management also explained that they are also developing a working relationship with NEMA and Utility companies to prioritize the needs of UNRA Projects and fast track the approval processes.

I advised the Accounting Officer to address project implementation impediments, closely monitor progress of works and ensure the contractor strictly adheres to the implementation plan.

4. Land Compensation

The total number of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) on the entire stretch of the road to be compensated were 1,349 PAPs

at a total cost of UGX.16,973,377,442. By 30 th June 2019, a cumulative total of 1,282 PAPs costing UGX.13,622,781,087 had been paid.

During the financial year under review, some changes in the horizontal alignment were made following a design review, and as such some new properties were affected by the road works. By the end of the financial year, UNRA was in the process of establishing the new land measurements and owners. The following matters were identified in the above process;

(i) Untitled land acquired

Section 7(1-2) of the Land Acquisition Act CAP 226, 1965, requires that where a declaration has been published in respect of any land, the assessment officer shall take possession of the land as soon as he or she has made his or her award under section 6 of this Act. Also that the land shall immediately, by operation of the Land Acquisition Act be vested in the Uganda Land Commission free from all encumbrances.

Through document review of the PAPs details and valuation reports, it was noted that a number of PAPs were compensated for untitled land, majorly in cases of customary land ownership. The land titles were not availed, which makes transfer of ownership difficult. This may be due to inadequate verification with land boards and local area leadership.

9











Acquisition of land without titles, poses a risk of future encumbrances and failure to obtain full transfer and ownership of the land.

(ii) Delays in transfer of titles to Government

Section 7(1-2) of the Land Acquisition Act CAP 226, 1965, requires that where a declaration has been published in respect of any land, the assessment officer shall take possession of the land as soon as he or she has made his or her award under section 6 of this Act. Also that the land shall immediately, by operation of the Land Acquisition Act be vested in the Uganda Land Commission free from all encumbrances.

I noted that out of 1,282 PAPs compensated with land approx. 341.7162 Acres, none of the titles had been transferred to Government, that is; neither to the names of Uganda National Roads Authority nor to Uganda Land Commission.

Failure to transfer land titles to Government exposes Government to possible loss of land through encroachments and future claims by third parties.

Management explained that the tenure system along the Project corridor is majorly private mailo land. Due diligence was both at the Masaka Land Office and the District Administrative Offices. The then RAP Consultant’s approach was to assess PAPS as ‘’Kibanja’’ tenants at 70% interest in the land since landlords were mainly absent. Landlord interest was later assessed at 30% value in land and the status of titles affected is as follows:

- Total Land titles - 110
- Land titles subdivided - 85 (77.3%)
- Residue titles returned - 85
- Land titles pending subdivision - 25 (22.7%)
- The transfer process of the ROW titles is work in progress.

I advised the Accounting Officer to undertake verification with the Land Boards and local area leadership to confirm land title ownership, to ease transfer.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

Kampala

4 th December, 2020

10











REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE INTERNAL CONTROL STRUCTURE OF MASAKA-BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT (PROJECT ID NO.0746) FOR THE YEAR ENDED

30 TH JUNE, 2019

Opinion

I have audited the financial statements of the Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project ID No. 0746, and reviewed the Internal Control procedures relevant to generation of accounting information presented in the financial statements, and those relevant to control over programme finances and the safeguard of its assets. I obtained all the information and explanation I considered necessary for the audit.

In my opinion, the Programme Management maintained an adequate internal control system for the preparation of reliable financial statements, control over finances and safeguard of the programme assets during the year ended 30 th June 2019.

Management Responsibility

Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal control structure. In fulfilling this responsibility, estimates and judgment are required to assess the expected benefits and related costs of internal control structure policies and procedures.

Auditor’s Responsibility

My examination was made in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs) and accordingly included such tests of the accounting records, verification of assets and liabilities and such other auditing procedures I considered necessary in the circumstances.

For the purpose of this report, I have classified the significant internal control structure policies and procedures in the following categories:-

- Control over preparation of withdrawal applications for funds from the project account.
- Bank and cash Purchases and payments.
- Monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

For all the internal control structure categories listed above, I obtained an understanding of the design of the relevant policies and procedures and whether they have been placed in operation and I assessed control risk.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

Kampala

4 th December, 2020

11











12











REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE SPECIAL ACCOUNT OPERATIONS OF MASAKA – BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT (PROJECT ID NO.0746) FOR THE

YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE, 2019

Opinion

I have audited the special account statement of Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project ID No. 0746 for the year ended 30 th June, 2019 which is set out on page 12 of the financial statements.

In my opinion, Project Management complied in all material respects with BADEA Loan rules and procedures and that the Special Account Statement for Masaka – Bukakata Road Project (Project ID No. 0746) for the year ended 30 th June, 2019 presents fairly in all material respects the account transactions and the closing balance as at 30 th June 2019.

Management Responsibility for the Special Account Statement

Project management is responsible for preparation of the special account statement and its fair presentation in accordance with the requirements of the Government of Uganda regulations and BADEA Loan guidelines. Management is also responsible for designing and implementing internal controls relevant to the preparation of the special account statement that is free from material misrepresentation, whether due to fraud or error and selecting and applying appropriate accounting policies and making accounting estimates that are reasonable in the circumstances.

Auditor’s Responsibility

My responsibility is to express an opinion on the Special Account Statement based on my audit. I conducted the audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and the BADEA loan guidelines on auditing. Those standards and guidelines require that I plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the Special Account statement is free from material misstatements. I believe that the audit provides a reasonable basis for my opinion.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

Kampala

4 th December, 2020

13











