THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF KAPCHORWA SUAM KITALE AND ELDORET BYPASS ROADS PROJECT (UGANDA) PROJECT ID NO.P-ZI-DB0-107, ADB LOAN NO. 2000200001051 AND ADF LOAN NO. 2100150037299 IMPLEMENTED BY UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY

FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 TH JUNE 2021

OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL

UGANDA











TABLE OF CONTENT
OPINION - 4
BASIS FOR OPINION - 4
KEY AUDIT MATTERS - 4
MANAGEMENT’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - 7
AUDITOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - 7
OTHER REGULATORY AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS - 8











LIST OF ACRONYMS

Acronym	Meaning	
AfDB	African Development Bank	
ADF	African Development Fund	
GoU	Government of Uganda	
IESBA	International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants	
ISAIs	International Standards on Auditing	
IPC	Interim Payment Certificate	
MoFPED	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development	
NAA	National Audit Act	
OAG	Office of the Auditor General	
PAPs	Project Affected Persons	
ROW	Right of Way	
UGX	Uganda Shilling	
UNRA	Uganda National Roads Authority	
USD	United States Dollars	














REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF KAPCHORWA SUAM KITALE AND ELDORET BYPASS ROADS PROJECT, PROJECT ID NO.P-ZI-DB0-107, ADB LOAN NO. 2000200001051 AND ADF LOAN NO. 2100150037299 FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2021

THE RT. HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

Opinion

I have audited the accompanying financial statements of Kapchorwa Suam and Eldoret Bypass Roads Project (Uganda), Project ID No.P-ZI-DB0-107, ADB Loan No. 2000200001051 and ADF Loan No. 2100150037299, implemented by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for the year ended 30 th June 2021. These financial statements comprise of the Statement of Receipts and Payments and the Statement of Fund Balance for the year then ended and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies adopted and other explanatory notes.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly in all material respects, Kapchorwa Suam and Eldoret Bypass Roads Project Statement of Receipts and Payments, and the Statement of Fund Balance for the year ended 30 th June 2020, in accordance with the terms and conditions of African Development Bank (AfDB) and African Development Fund (ADF) funding agreements, and the cash basis of accounting described in Section 8.0 of the financial statements.

Basis for Opinion

I conducted my audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). My responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of Project Management in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) as amended, the National Audit Act 2008, the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (IESBA Code) together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the financial statements in Uganda, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and the IESBA Code. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Key Audit Matters

Key audit matters are those matters that, in my professional judgment, were of most significance in my audit of the financial statements of the period. These matters were addressed in the context of the audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming my opinion thereon, and I do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. I have determined the matters described below as key audit matters to be communicated in my report.

1. Compensation of Project Affected Persons

Section 42 of the Land Act, 1998 empowers Government to acquire land for public interest in exchange for compensation of owners or tenants based upon market value of the land plus disturbance allowance.

The Government of Uganda has been implementing a number of infrastructure development projects across sectors. The Government of Uganda (GoU) received financing support from the African Development Bank (AfDB) and African Development Fund (ADF) to implement the Kapchorwa Suam Road Project. The Project comprises of among other











components the upgrading Kapchorwa-Suam Road (73km) and supervision consultancy, studies, training of unemployed youth and capacity building; compensation and resettlement.

The area- Compensation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) was identified at the preliminary stage of the planning during the risk assessment of the project, as a significant service delivery point, directly impacting on its mandate and an area of high stakeholder concern on the operational efficiency of the project. I focused on this area because of some of the PAPs disputed the amounts assessed by UNRA and they have not yet been paid. Delayed compensation or non-compensation of PAPs affects progress of civil works.

Before implementing this project, and in accordance with the laws of Uganda, Government has to acquire land rights by valuing the land of the project affected persons (PAPs), compensating the PAPs and finally demarcating the right of way (ROW).

I designed specific programmes for execution to ascertain whether all valuations are done in accordance with the applicable law, regulations and best practice, whether the compensation process is fair, just and complete, whether persons compensated are the bona-fide owners of the land and, to establish procedures and action taken after compensation of PAPs.

Based on the above procedures, I noted the following:

No	Observations	Recommendations	
1.1	Delayed Access and Possession of Site by the ContractorSection 2.1.1 of the Particular Conditions of the Civil Works Contract between UNRA and China State Construction Engineering Corporation requires that the employer shall give right of access and possession of all the site within 546 days from the commencement date which was 1 st October 2018.noted that the last section of the road (from km 48+000 to km 073+000) was granted to the contractor on the 14 th of June 2021 which is after 888 days. In addition to this the following were observed:• Additional land acquisition is still under progress from Km33+000 to Km73+000. Civil works from Km 46 to Km 58 have been put on hold pending additional land take especially for slope protection.• As per the Road Act 2019, the Road Reserve should be kept clear of any buildings. However, it was noted that new structures were being erected in the road reserve at Km17+692 and KM5+430.• Some PAPs within the possessed section had not been assessed and some assessed but not compensated for example graves were noted at Km22+500, 35+200, Km 37+240 and Km 39+260 where construction has been put on hold pending their reallocation.• All the PAPs interviewed could not clearly identify what land had been taken over from them for the road construction and the road reserve.Non-settlement of PAPs’ claims before commencement ofI	toadvised UNRA Management fast track the land acquisition process and clear all issues relating to PAPs and to mark the ROW and road reserve with clearly visible signs at the time of land take.I	














	construction exposes the project to refusal of handover of land by PAPs, litigation costs by the PAPs, delayed project implementation and a risk of the Donors withdrawal of funding.Management explained that the entire Right of Way (ROW) was on track to be handed over within the required period. Indeed, this was done for the first 48 kilometers. However, emphasis had to be put on the Kapchorwa Teryet section which was prioritized to facilitate the development of the High Altitude Training Centre. While this was being done, the country was placed under lockdown on two separate occasions which impeded the completion of land acquisition activities according to plan. Management further explained that the Land Acquisition team is reviewing the contentious sections to ensure no structures are erected in the ROW and that the fast tracking of the compensation is ongoing and most of the obstructions will be settled with the implementation of the extra land take.		
1.2	Non-compliance with Contractual Obligations – Delays in execution of Project Civil Works Included in the financial statements under Note 9.2.1.2 is UGX 113,221,277,379 (inclusive of advance payment of 20% of the contract value) relating to Civil Works. The amount accounts for 71.8% of (UGX 157,722,259,585) exclusive of surplus funds re-allocated.the total cumulative project expenditureI noted that UNRA engaged M/S China State Construction Engineering Corporation Ltd on the 7 th May 2018 to upgrade Kapchorwa-Suam road for a period of 36 months, with effect from 1 st October 2018. There was an extension of time of 4.5 months up to 15 th February 2022.on the extension of time, the time elapsed as at 30 th June 2021 was 33 months that is 81.40 %. However the reported cumulative physical progress for civil works was 43.14% with no active works from Km 55 to km 73. The site at KM 49+400 and Km 48+700 is prone to landslides which could be a road user hazard but the designs with the respective target quantities for this section have not been finalized. There was noticeable failure of the lined drain at KM6 (right-hand). In addition to this, the same lined drain was constructed halfway from bottom leaving the upper part exposed.also noted that these project components have not been Implemented;• Provision of Consultancy Services for Road Safety Audits and Road Safety Awareness and Training. Training in Labor Based Construction Techniques. Refurbishment of a Post-Crash Care Centre and procurement of theatre equipment.• •explained that physical progress had reached 49.08% as of September 2021. Management further explained that the contractor had submitted the Revised Program of works showing that works will be complete by 31 st December 2022.also explained that the Contract for provision of Consultancy Services for Road Safety Audit and Road Safety Awareness and Training was signed on 15 th April 2021, and theIBasedManagementManagement	advised Management together with the Supervising Consultant and the contractor to address all issues contributing the slow progress to avoid the additional costs related not completing the project in contractual time.thetotoI	














Memorandum of Understanding to Train Project Beneficiaries in Labor Based Construction Techniques was signed between UNRA and Mount Elgon Training Centre (MELTC) however, the activities were hampered by the COVID-19 restrictions.

Other Information

Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Project background, objectives and management information. The other information does not include the financial statements and my audit report thereon. My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work I have performed, I conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information; I am required to report that fact.

I have nothing to report in this regard.

Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements

Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the Project financial statements in accordance with Government of Uganda and African Development Bank Guidelines, and the cash basis of accounting as described under section 8.0 to the financial statements and for maintenance of such internal controls as Management determines is necessary for the preparation and fair presentation of the Project financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, Management is responsible for assessing the Project’s ability to achieve its core objectives, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to the achievement of its objectives, unless management either intends to close the project or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so. Management is responsible for overseeing the Project’s financial reporting process.

Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements

My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, I exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:

- Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.











- Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Project’s internal control.

- Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by Management.

- Conclude on the appropriateness of Management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Project’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Project to fail to deliver on its mandate.

- Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with Management regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.

I also provide Management with a statement that I have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with him/her all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on my independence, and where applicable, related safeguards.

From the matters communicated with the Management, I determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. I describe these matters in my auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, I determine that a matter should not be communicated in my report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.

Other Regulatory and Reporting Requirements I consider it necessary to communicate the following matters other than those presented or disclosed in the financial statements:

Compliance with the Provisions of the Loan Agreement Obligations

UNRA complied with the loan agreement covenants. I have obtained all the information and explanations, and all expenses were eligible.

GoU Counterpart Funding

I confirm that the Government of Uganda has fulfilled its counterpart obligations of the project for the year ended 30 th June 2021.











Internal Controls

As part of my audit scope and in accordance with International Standards on Auditing, I considered internal controls relevant to UNRA in the preparation and fair presentation of Kapchorwa-Suam Project financial statements for the year ended 30 th June 2021, in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate. Other than the matters referred to in the report, the Internal Control structure for Kapchorwa-Suam Project, was found to be appropriate.

John F.S. Muwanga

AUDITOR GENERAL

04 th November, 2021











